No life can be pleasanter than life during the months
of fall on a ranch in the northern cattle country. The
weather is cool; in the evenings and on the rare rainy days
we are glad to sit by the great fireplace, with its roaring
cottonwood logs. But on most days not a cloud dims the
serene splendor of the sky; and the fresh pure air is clear
with the wonderful clearness of the high plains. We are in
the saddle from morning to night.
The long, low, roomy ranch house, of clean hewed
logs, is as comfortable as it is bare and plain. We fare simply but well; for the wife of my foreman makes excellent
bread and cake, and there are plenty of potatoes, grown in
the forlorn little garden-patch on the bottom. We also
have jellies and jams, made from wild plums and buffalo
berries; and all the milk we can drink. For meat we depend
on our rifles; and, with an occasional interlude of ducks or
prairie chickens, the mainstay of each meal is venison,
roasted, broiled, or fried.
Sometimes we shoot the deer when we happen on
them while about our ordinary business,—indeed
throughout the time that I have lived on the ranch, very
many of the deer and antelope I killed were thus obtained.
Of course while doing the actual round-up work it is impossible to attend to anything else; but we generally carry
rifles while riding after the saddle band in the early morning, while visiting the line camps, or while in the saddle
among the cattle on the range; and get many a shot in this
fashion.
In the fall of 1890 some friends came to my ranch;
and one day we took them to see a round-up. The OX, a
Texan steer-outfit, had sent a couple of wagons to work
down the river, after beef cattle, and one of my men had
gone along to gather any of my own scattered steers that
were ready for shipping, and to brand the late calves.
There were perhaps a dozen riders with the wagons; and
they were camped for the day on a big bottom where
Blacktail and Whitetail creeks open into the river, several
miles below my ranch.
At dawn one of the men rode off to bring in the saddle band. The rest of us were up by sunrise; and as we
stood on the veranda under the shimmering cottonwood
trees, revelling in the blue of the cloudless sky, and drinking in the cool air before going to breakfast, we saw the
motley-colored string of ponies file down from the opposite bank of the river, and splash across the broad, shallow
ford in front of the ranch house. Cantering and trotting
the band swept towards the high, round horse-corral, in
the open glade to the rear of the house. Guided by the jutting wing which stuck out at right angles, they entered the
open gate, which was promptly closed by the cowboy who
had driven them in.
After breakfast we strolled over to the corral, with our
lariats, and, standing by the snubbing-post in the middle.
roped the horses we wished for the party—some that were
gentle, and others that were not. Then every man saddled
his horse; and at the moment of mounting for the start
there was, as always, a thrill of mild excitement, each rider
hoping that his own horse would not buck, and that his
neighbor’s would. I had no young horses on the ranch at
the time; but a number of the older ones still possessed
some of the least amiable traits of their youth.
Once in the saddle we rode off down river, along the
bottoms, crossing the stream again and again. We went in
Indian file, as is necessary among the trees and in broken
ground, following the cattle-trails— which themselves
had replaced or broadened the game paths that alone
crossed the plateaus and bottoms when my ranch house
was first built. Now we crossed open reaches of coarse
grass, thinly sprinkled with large, brittle cottonwood trees,
their branches torn and splintered; now we wound our
way through a dense jungle where the gray, thorny buffalo
bushes, spangled with brilliant red berry clusters, choked
the spaces between the thick-growing box-alders; and
again the sure-footed ponies scrambled down one cut
bank and up another, through seemingly impossible rifts,
or with gingerly footsteps trod a path which cut the side
of a butte or overhung a bluff Sometimes we racked, or
shacked along at the fox trot which is the cow-pony’s ordinary gait; and sometimes we loped or galloped and ran.
At last we came to the ford beyond which the riders
of the round-up had made their camp. In the bygone days
of the elk and buffalo, when our branded cattle were first
driven thus far north, this ford had been dangerous from quicksand; but the cattle, ever crossing and re-crossing,
had trodden down and settled the sand, and had found out
the firm places; so that it was now easy to get over.
Close beyond the trees on the farther bank stood the
two round-up wagons; near by was the cook’s fire, in a
trench, so that it might not spread; the bedding of the riders and horse-wranglers lay scattered about, each roll of
blankets wrapped and corded in a stout canvas sheet. The
cook was busy about the fire; the night-wrangler was
snatching an hour or two’s sleep under one of the wagons.
Half a mile away, on the plain of sage-brush and long
grass, the day-wrangler was guarding the grazing or resting horse herd, of over a hundred head. Still farther distant, at the mouth of a ravine, was the day-herd of cattle,
two or three cowboys watching it as they lolled drowsily in
their saddles. The other riders were off on circles to bring
in cattle to the round-up; they were expected every moment.
With the ready hospitality always shown in a cow-
camp we were pressed to eat and take dinner, or at least
a lunch; and accordingly we jumped off our horses and sat
down. Our tin plates were soon heaped with fresh beef,
bread, tomatoes, rice, and potatoes, all very good; for the
tall, bearded, scrawny cook knew his work, and the OX
outfit always fed its men well,—and saw that they worked
well too.
