He doesn’t waste words unnecessarily. ‘We are gathering the fell tomorrow.’

‘OK.’

‘Meet at the fell gate at 5 a.m.’

‘Right.’ Then he hangs up to call someone else. I knew it was impending because of the date, and because it is time to clip the ewes, but it is a communal job that needs the right weather, and men to be free of other work to do it. So it’s a bit like waiting for D-Day – you never know until the phone call, or shout from the road as he passes, to say ‘It’s on tomorrow’. image

Gathering is ancient communal work that consists of everyone with rights to graze sheep on the unfenced common land working together with their sheepdogs to bring in the flocks from the fells. There are about ten different flocks of sheep on our fell, a vast unenclosed piece of moorland and mountain. Because there are no large predators, the sheep are left to graze alone, but are brought down several times a year for lambing, clipping and other key activities in the life of the flock. Beyond our common lie other unfenced areas of mountain land, other fells, farmed by other commoners, so in theory our sheep could wander right across the Lake District. But they don’t because they know their place on the mountains. They are ‘hefted’ – taught their sense of belonging by their mothers as lambs – an unbroken chain of learning that goes back thousands of years. So the sheep can never be sold from the fell without breaking that ancient link. This is, they say, the greatest concentration of common land in Western Europe; and on it survives a kind of farming that is older than that which exists across much of the world today. The fell land we are gathering today doesn’t belong to us, it belongs to the National Trust. Other fells belong to other landowners, but we have an ancient legal right to graze a set number of sheep on it. Many of these mountainous areas of land were bought and given to the National Trust by wealthy benefactors like Beatrix Potter, who trusted them to protect the landscape and its unique way of life. The bequests often stressed that the fell flocks had to remain Herdwick sheep. There are different kinds of ownership on one piece of land. The grazing rights on our fell are divided into something called ‘stints’ (a share of the common rights); and each stint you own, or rent, entitles you to graze a certain number of sheep (six per stint on our fell). We buy and sell and rent stints so that older farmers can retire and their grazing rights and flocks can be taken forward by the next generation. The owner of the fell sometimes owns no stints and cannot therefore graze his own land unless there are surplus grazing rights. The rights to graze are held in common with our fellow commoners. ‘Commoner’ isn’t a dirty word here; it is a thing to be proud of. It means you have rights to something of value, that you contribute to the management of the fells, and that you take part in our way of life as an equal with the other farmers. If you farm Herdwick or Swaledale sheep and they are hefted to the common grazing land on the fells, then you, by definition, often belong to an association of ‘commoners’. This is all a strange hangover from a feudal past when we paid dues (including bearing arms) to the Lord of the Manor in return for the right to graze the poor mountain land. But no dues have been paid for a long time now. The aristocrats either disappeared or couldn’t be bothered to contest our rights, because we are troublesome and stubborn when crossed. It was more effort than it was worth, so we, the peasants, won. We are a tiny part of an ancient farming system and way of life that somehow has survived in these mountains because of their historic poverty, relative isolation, and because it was protected from change by the early conservation movement. My ewes and lambs have been up in the mountains for nearly eight weeks. They are Herdwick sheep, native to the Lake District fells and bred for centuries to suit this landscape, this climate and this way of farming. They have two functions: survive the winters and the tough times, and in the spring and summer months produce good lambs and rear them in the mountains so the flock is sustained with ewe lambs and the farms have a surplus of lambs to sell. In the eight weeks since I brought them here, I have not seen many of them. They have looked after themselves on the abundant summer grass. Our shepherding culture includes periods when the sheep graze the fells away from our supervision. Only the ewes with twins stay down on the lower slopes on our own fenced land, called ‘intakes’ or ‘allotments’, because they need better nutrition to rear twins than the mountains offer. So I am anxious to see them again, keen to check that they are alive and well. Above all, I am interested to see how much my lambs have grown since I brought them up when they were just a month old in May. It is now the second week in July. Mist hangs in the hollows as I head across the high ground to the fell gate.