Manifold are the shapes taken by the American
wilderness. In the east, from the Atlantic coast to
the Mississippi valley, it's a land of magnificent hardwood
forest. In endless variety and beauty, the trees cover the
ground, save only where they have been cleared away by
man, or where towards the west the expanse of the forest
is broken by fertile prairies. Towards the north, this region
of hardwood trees merges insensibly into the southern ex¬
tension of the great subarctic forest; here the silver stems
of birches gleam against the sombre background of coniferous evergreens. In the southeast again, by the hot, oozy
coasts of the South Atlantic and the Gulf, the forest be¬
comes semi-tropical; palms wave their feathery fronds,
and the tepid swamps teem with reptile life.
Some distance beyond the Mississippi, stretching
from Texas to North Dakota, and westward to the Rocky
Mountains, lies the plains country. This is a region of light
rainfall, where the ground is clad with short grass, while
cottonwood trees fringe the courses of the winding plains
' streams; streams that are alternately turbid torrents and
mere dwindling threads of water. The great stretches of
natural pasture are broken by gray sage-brush plains, and
tracts of strangely shaped and colored Bad Lands; sun- scorched wastes in summer, and in winter arctic in their
iron desolation. Beyond the plains rise the Rocky Mountains, their flanks covered with coniferous woods; but the
trees are small, and do not ordinarily grow very closely together. Towards the north the forest becomes denser, and
the peaks higher; and glaciers creep down towards the valleys from the fields of everlasting snow. The brooks are brawling, trout-filled torrents; the swift rivers foam over
rapid and cataract, on their way to one or the other of the
two great oceans.
Southwest of the Rockies evil and terrible deserts
stretch for leagues and leagues, mere waterless wastes of
sandy plain and barren mountain, broken here and there
by narrow strips of fertile ground. Rain rarely falls, and
there are no clouds to dim the brazen sun. The rivers run
in deep canyons, or are swallowed by the burning sand; the
smaller watercourses are dry throughout the greater part
of the year.
Beyond this desert region rise the sunny Sierras of
California, with their flower-clad slopes and groves of
giant trees; and north of them, along the coast, the rain-
shrouded mountain chains of Oregon and Washington,
matted with the towering growth of the mighty evergreen
forest.
The white hunters, who from time to time first penetrated the different parts of this wilderness, found themselves in such hunting grounds as those wherein, long ages
before, their Old-World forefathers had dwelt; and the
game they chased was much the same as that their lusty
barbarian ancestors followed, with weapons of bronze and
of iron, in the dim years before history dawned. As late as the end of the seventeenth century the turbulent village
nobles of Lithuania and Livonia hunted the bear, the
bison, the elk, the wolf, and the stag, and hung the spoils
in their smoky wooden palaces; and so, two hundred years
later, the free hunters of Montana, in the interludes between hazardous mining quests and bloody Indian campaigns, hunted game almost or quite the same in kind,
through the cold mountain forests surrounding the Yellowstone and Flathead lakes, and decked their log cabins
and ranch houses with the hides and horns of the slaughtered beasts.
Zoologically speaking, the north temperate zones of
the Old and New Worlds are very similar, differing from
one another much less than they do from the various regions south of them, or than these regions differ among
themselves. The untrodden American wilderness resembles both in game and physical character the forests, the
mountains, and the steppes of the Old World as it was at
the beginning of our era. Great woods of pine and fir,
birch and beech, oak and chestnut; streams where the
chief game fish are spotted trout and silvery salmon;
grouse of various kinds as the most common game birds;
all these the hunter finds as characteristic of the New
World as of the Old. So it is with most of the beasts of the
chase, and so also with the fur-bearing animals that furnish to the trapper ahke his life work and his means of
livelihood. The bear, wolf, bison, moose, caribou, wapiti,
deer, and bighorn, the lynx, fox, wolverine, sable, mink, ermine, beaver, badger, and otter of both worlds are either
identical or more or less closely kin to one another. Sometimes of the two forms, that found in the Old World is the largest. Perhaps more often the reverse is true, the American beast being superior in size. This is markedly the case
with the wapiti, which is merely a giant brother of the European stag, exactly as the fisher is merely a very large
cousin of the European sable or marten. The extraordinary prong-buck, the only hollow-horned ruminant
which sheds its horns annually, is a distant representative
of the Old-World antelopes of the steppes; the queer
white antelope-goat has for its nearest kinsfolk certain
Himalayan species. Of the animals commonly known to
our hunters and trappers, only a few, such as the cougar,
peccary, raccoon, possum (and among birds the wild
turkey), find their nearest representatives and type forms
in tropical America.
Of course this general resemblance does not mean
identity. The differences in plant fife and animal fife, no
less than in the physical features of the land, are sufficiently marked to give the American wilderness a character distinctively its own. 

