It really is enormous. And I think when we were making this discovery, it was quite shocking to me. But so, first of all, some of this is easy to understand. It’s actually quite easy to count carbon and what happens to it in a forest—when you measure a tree, how tall it is, how wide it is. About 50 percent of a tree is carbon, and so you can easily measure how much carbon is in the tree when you know the size of the tree and the number of trees. So it’s very easy to count carbon aboveground: the trees and the logs and the plants growing aboveground.
When you clear-cut a forest, pretty much all of that disappears. So clear-cutting takes down all the trees—that’s why it’s called a clear-cut. Everything is gone, basically. The shrubs, the plants, the mosses are also removed through the use of the heavy machinery. What’s left behind is some slash, and usually it’s the twigs and branches and any broken bits of wood that are left behind. And actually that new material—you could think of it as new material—is still on site, but it’s completely different than a living tree or a living organism. So you can assume that almost all of the aboveground carbon pool is removed with a clear-cut except for this new slash.
Then the second thing, and this is the most important discovery, is that we also found that the forest floor, which comprises, in a temperate forest, about 50 percent of the belowground carbon pool— Okay, so just to put in, what is the belowground carbon pool? That’s all the carbon that’s in the organic layer on the top—we call that the forest floor—and all the carbon that’s in the mineral soil: so that is basically sequestered and attached to all of the mineral particles in the soil. So about half of that is in the mineral soil, half of that is in the forest floor. And that amount, that total amount in a temperate forest, is about equal to the amount that’s aboveground, which is the part that you actually see when you’re walking through the forest. So we found that when you do this harvesting—and this harvesting has evolved over the last few decades to where it’s most cost effective to drag an entire tree out of the forest, delimb it at the landing, meaning cut off all of its branches and needles at the landing, buck it into lengths, and then put it on a logging truck.
So the act of dragging that whole tree through the forest really disrupts that forest floor and takes all that sort of labile carbon and nutrients that are in the needles and leaves off the site, leaving a very damaged forest floor. So we found that we lost 61 percent of that forest floor through the act of doing this whole-tree logging.
yes. And thinking, why is that so devastating? It’s because it did take ten thousand years to develop that forest floor. Soil processes, we call them pedogenic processes, by their very nature are very slow and happen over thousands of years. And so the instant destruction, I thought, was absolutely devastating. I have another part to that story that isn’t quite so devastating, but that was a big finding from the Mother Tree. And it didn’t matter where you were, whether you were in a dry forest, a moist forest, a wet forest, a cold forest, it was the same result across all of our nine sites. The other thing we found is that it didn’t matter, actually, if you clear-cut the forest or did selective harvesting; if the machines were on the site and moving around and dragging things around, that was the key. It was the machines themselves that were doing the damage and the dragging of the trees out of the site.
I mean, you can replant those forests. And the idea in Canada was to convert the old-growth and primary forests. So, a primary forest is a forest that’s never been logged before. And the idea was to convert those old and primary forests to what Europeans called the “normal” forest. And a normal forest is like a plantation, basically, that follows a bell curve or a normal curve. So you’ve got a fairly narrow range of sizes of trees and also species mixes. So these very simplified forests. That means that there isn’t as much biodiversity, there isn’t the capability to actually photosynthesize as much as a multilayered old forest. And so replanting the forest—okay, we can do that, and we can actually establish the forest even in a diminished forest floor, but what we’re establishing isn’t the same thing that we took away.
And so those two combined: the loss of some of the forest floor, which is where the soil food web is, and all those mycorrhizal networks—it’s diminished; and also you’re planting back a very simplified forest. Those two things together mean that the forest isn’t coming back to where it was before.
So what we’re talking about here is the agency in the more-than-human world and the human world to work together to create a beautiful thing. And so, let me preface the story of the salmon with that—the previous thing that I just said, that we’re diminishing the forest floor through harvesting and that this is devastating—we’re actually finding that that forest floor is recovering fairly quickly. Okay, so this is new information. We’re just analyzing that data, and it’s another one of those incredible aha moments. And the salmon story illustrates, largely, I think, what’s going on. So the details are different for my forest, but it’s the same concept of the human and the more-than-human world working together to create a beautiful thing: a forest that is beautiful and productive and diverse.

