he photo in the text messag¬¬e, from a wildlife rehabilitator friend, looked like a wet washcloth. The text explained that this was a baby bird, found on the ground. No nest in sight. My own experience as a rehabilitator led me to conclude that if this bird was still alive, it would be a surprise.
The barely living baby’s dirt-matted down was full of fly eggs. In a matter of hours those eggs would hatch; maggots would tunnel into the bird. The poor chick was about to be eaten alive.
Washed, warmed, and stabilized, the chick remained so bedraggled that it wasn’t obvious what kind of bird this was. Based on size — the little being fit into one’s palm — I figured that this tiny baby whose luck had just turned a corner must be an eastern screech owl. They nest in dark, secure tree cavities. Somehow, this owlet had been dragged and dropped. Perhaps by a crow? Was this disheveled nestling the only survivor?
And so it came to be that I, along with my wife Patricia, took in this babe, who began a new phase of life — a growing, thriving phase.
Like all babies, this new owl didn’t arrive with instructions. But we had a parenting philosophy. We frequently let her join us whether in the back yard or in the kitchen. We wanted plenty of stimulation and freedom of movement to develop an active mind and a strong body. Meanwhile, we’d back her up, we’d keep her safe and well.
Our dogs, Chula and Jude, were pre-adapted to being friendly with small birds who could only flutter. They had grown up around our two little rescued parrots as well as our small flock of free-roving chickens.
We named the owl Alfie, which sounded like “owlfie.” We did not have a way of knowing gender, but we started calling Alfie “she.” She was not confined. Patricia and I had planned to simply let her choose, like a normal wild bird, to widen her circle of independence when she attained the power of flight. Allowing a young creature to come and go, and backing them up while they are trying to figure out what to do and what to avoid — without natural parents to model how to survive — is called a “soft release.”
The plan for Alfie was that she’d be with us for a couple of weeks, and then at her own pace would find her independence. Parent owls care for and feed their young for many weeks after they leave the nest. With parental backup giving them the needed time, young fledgers sharpen new skills while learning how to become wild. We planned to mimic that.
But soon a problem emerged. Actually, the problem was in what failed to emerge: feathers crucial for flight. While her main flight-powering “primary” feathers of both wings had grown out beautifully, none of the other flight feathers were coming. Two-thirds of each wing was essentially bare. Her flight was delayed. Perhaps indefinitely.
Fortunately, in early autumn Alfie molted fully — wings, body, tail. She exchanged her fluffy fledgling flannel pajamas for a sleek new set of adult feathers. Her wing feathers grew out perfectly, and by mid-autumn she was simply stunning. I could hardly take my eyes off her.
With all her wing feathers grown in perfectly, Alfie could now fly well. But by late October, the field crickets’ calls were slowing. Letting her wander off now, into a world with temperatures getting too cool for crickets, moths, and other insect prey seemed a worsening prospect. Inexperienced as she was, she would be unlikely to find enough to eat.
So I prepared the entire outdoor portion of our chicken coop for her. And there, content and safe from the possibility of starvation, she spent the winter. She was comfortable. I was not. An owl who is not out doing owly things is just a bird in a cage.
When summer finally returned I started letting Alfie fly from the coop to me for food. I wanted to get her oriented to a wider view.
One day I opened the door of the coop, walked out about 10 paces, turned, and raised my arm, offering her a morning meal. She fluttered out and landed on my arm. But she did not take the food. Instead, those big eyes of hers scanned the wider world, scanned the trees, scanned the sky. Taking it all in.
I was pulling off a little piece to hand-feed her and refocus her attention when she flew into a maple on the side of the yard. But not high, and then she came down low enough for me to give her some food and pick her up and put her in the coop. This time I left the door open.
In the morning, the eighth day of September, I checked the coop. The food I’d left remained untouched. I called. And called. No answer, no owl.
My main fear had been that Alfie, not having learned how to hunt, would wander off and starve.
Soon I noticed something even more worrying. Just outside the back steps were several screech owl body feathers. They appeared to have been forcibly pulled out. There seemed little question that something had attacked a screech owl. I’d let a perfectly tame, rather comfortable little owl face the harsh world. Whose best interests was I really concerned about? Hers? Or my imagined ideal outcome? I’d opened the door. She’d chosen to come out. It had been a gamble.

