You know, I’ll just start with that I grew up in forests. I understand forests in a deep ancestral way. When I was growing up in the 1960s, they were all old-growth forests and primary forests. And I saw those forests get taken down, basically, through my lifetime. And I have a visceral, intuitive reaction to this, that we’re undermining our own vitality by doing this, and we don’t need to do it. And so I wanted to take my research, which shows the connections in the forest, that the forest is an intimately connected place, that it is interdependent, it’s based on these intimate relationships between all the creatures, all the beings in the forest, including the water and the soil and the forest floor and the trees and the animals. They’re all in relationship and connected together. And by severing those linkages and severing those relationships, we’re actually unraveling the forest—through the practice of clear-cutting, which is the dominant form of forestry that’s practiced in Canada and in many parts of the world—that we’re actually severing those connections. So I thought, I want to take that fundamental knowledge that we learned through the work that’s outlined in Finding the Mother Tree: that the forest is an interconnected place, that the energetic centers of the forest are these big old trees, what we call the Mother Trees. And how do we protect those? And so I really wanted to figure that out—practical solutions that can be adapted and applied, and to demonstrate that we can do this in a different way. And we’re finding that the answers are right there in the forest. We’re finding these beautiful discoveries, like you can apply this basic fundamental understanding to protect those relationships and therefore protect the integrity, which means the health and patterns of the ecosystem, through careful stewardship.
Yeah. I’m a forest ecologist, and so I understand the importance of place and people. And I did my research under the supervision of Dr. David Perry, who has Athabascan ancestry. And I didn’t really know it at the time, but I was listening to him in a deep way. But I never really put it together. And I was working at UBC (University of British Columbia), and I got a postdoc, Dr. Teresa Ryan, who’s from the Tsimshian Nation. And we just started talking. And she had written her dissertation on salmon in forests and also on her ancestral knowledge systems: the way of seeing the world, the way of valuing the world, the methodologies that were used. And it was just such a relief to hear, because I had been sort of fighting this institution of forestry, industrial forestry, for my entire career, trying to get the powers to be to understand the forest as a connected, sensitive system. And she just said, yes, well, that’s our value system. And, from that point on, she just started to teach me about the methodology of her Nation, which is, as I said, the Tsimshian Nation. And we just started doing research together. And that’s just expanded to where all of my work now is with Aboriginal people and understanding, as I said, their ways of seeing and their ways of knowing and their ways of doing, which are much more embedded and more respectful of the land than the colonial approach.
So that includes basic principles of, first of all, respect for the land. Respect meaning that you honor this place that is our home, and that we are that home too, we are nature ourselves; that we’re integral with it, not separate from it. The first principle of colonial Western thought is that we are separate, right? And from that we’ve lost basically the respect for our home, because we thought we were separate from it. So that’s a major departure in the ways of seeing the world.
The second thing that I learned so much was this idea of reciprocity. So reciprocity means that first you look, you ask permission, and then if the forest is able to provide, then you harvest, but you always give back as much as you take, if not more. And so that means that the forest is under a continuous cycle of health and growth and well-being. And in Western forestry, that is not the case at all. We take and take and take, and we don’t give back. And so then the result is these forests are, in my view, being degraded over time.
The third principle, I would say is a deep, deep responsibility to the land. So that means that there is ancestral responsibility to look after the resources, care for the resources, and that is handed down through the generations. And in colonial forestry, that sense of responsibility to the land just isn’t there as much, you know? It’s like, okay, I got a job here, I’m going to do this job for a while and then I’m going to move on. And certainly at a personal level, at the industrial level, the big major companies that basically have jurisdiction over harvesting of the resources, they don’t feel that responsibility to the land. They feel their responsibility to the shareholder, which is dispersed throughout the world. So that’s a major, major departure. And I think those basic values and ways of doing things translate into a much different look on the land of what you have after you’ve been working with the forest.

