This morning, Ben—the alpha—is not with the first group of chimps we’ve found. So Macallan, age 20, tries a bit of male display, dragging stuff around. But he’s entirely silent. He wants to impress onlookers—without summoning Ben’s rage.
And Lafroig, five years younger, begins displaying too, being very careful to make a show of himself while avoiding confronting Macallan directly.
This is the slow, years-long boil of chimp ambitions.
Their performances agitate the females. One screams, bringing Ben suddenly barreling in, letting everyone know who’s boss. Now Macallan is streaking across the ground at top speed with Ben in hot pursuit. Macallan’s wails are audible for the next hundred yards.
Everyone is screaming, running up tree-trunks. Large males who were playing peacefully with babies abruptly chase off the screaming little ones. Mothers begin defending and collecting their kids. It’s chaos.
Ben comes running back, demonstrating authority in all directions, hooting, jumping trunk to trunk, shaking branches—.
His performance creates more fleeing and shrieking. And what started it? Macallan had simply displayed.
It’s easy to say, ‘that’s all it was.’ But to them it’s a big deal. To the males, it’s their whole deal.
To be honest, it’s all getting on my nerves. The males’ demands for acknowledgment of rank, the intimidated screaming and submissive grunting; the young and the females caught in cross-firing ambitions and in the obsessive insecurities of high-status males—. It’s wearing thin on me. It doesn’t just waste everyone’s time; it’s oppressive.
“They make their lives much more unpleasant than necessary,” I venture.
“Yeah,” sighs Cat Hobaiter, who has devoted her life to studying the chimpanzees of Uganda’s Budongo Forest.
Virtually all the problems chimps create for themselves are caused by male aggression driven by male obsession with male status. Caught in a social web of ambition, forced respect, coercion, inter-group conflict, and episodic violence within their own community, chimps are their own worst enemies.
Quite simply, it’s too familiar. It’s apparent in many ways that chimps are our close relatives. Chimp male status is gained, lost, and enforced through threats and violence. With chimps as with humans, male passions don’t just waste everyone’s time; they waste potential for better-quality time. It’s the testosterone talking.
About six million years ago our common ancestor hit a fork in the tree. What would become Pan—chimpanzees and bonobos—and what would become Homo began separate trajectories. Various Homo species—differing species of humans—evolved and flourished. (Bonobos are superficially similar to chimpanzees but separate species whose ancestors split around two million years ago. Their range, far smaller, does not overlap with chimpanzees.) Gorillas had begun their journey much earlier, about ten million years ago; orangutans, roughly fifteen. Our species, Homo sapiens—not gorillas—is the closest living relative of the modern chimpanzee and bonobo.
Human sensibilities resonate with chimpanzees’ behavior because our evolutionary history is almost entirely shared. Human and chimpanzee DNA is about 98 percent similar. Chimps horrify and delight us because we recognize parts of ourselves. So much of what is uncomfortable for us in watching chimps is their excruciating similarity to us.
Chimpanzees and bonobos share more than 99 percent of their DNA. Yet socially, they differ fundamentally. In chimpanzees the most dominant individual is always male. In bonobo society, the highest-ranking individual is always a female. Chimpanzee males form alliances to win aggressive, often violent contests for dominance. Bonobo females form alliances to keep male aggression in check, preempting violence. Among bonobos fighting is rare; murder is unheard of. Bonobo females achieve status as they simply age into high rank through seniority. Chimpanzee males use violence to entitle themselves to sex; bonobo females use sex to deter violence. Chimpanzees resolve sexual conflict with power. Bonobos resolve power conflicts with sex. Chimpanzees limit sex to one posture and mainly one function; bonobos never saw genitals they didn’t like. Bonobos welcome and frolic with strangers, flirt rather than hurt, make love not war. In experiments, bonobos unlock doors to eat with strangers, even when it means being outnumbered by members of another group. No chimp would ever do that; chimpanzees fear and attack strangers. Bonobos will even let a stranger get into a food-filled room that they themselves cannot get into. In order to win in chimpanzee society, someone must lose. Violence within the community is a defining quirk of chimp life. Humans share that kink. The difference between chimpanzees and bonobos is like the difference between sports teams and musical groups; in one system someone loses; in the other everybody wins. Why can’t chimpanzees just be nice? Why can’t we? Because we’re not bonobos. And that’s just bad luck; we are as closely related to bonobos as to chimpanzees.
The bonobos’ emphasis on creating and maintaining the peace in bonobo society surpasses both chimpanzees’ and humans’. In the bonobo brain, the areas that perceive distress in other individuals and those that dampen aggressive impulses are enlarged. “The bonobo may well have the most empathic brain of all hominids, including us,” writes Frans de Waal. Bonobos have been said to have a threefold path to peace: little violence among males, between sexes, and among communities. The only person who has studied both free-living chimps and bonobos, Takeshi Furuichi, has noted that, “With bonobos everything is peaceful,” he has said. “When I see bonobos, they seem to be enjoying their lives.”
Bonobo power is female; and dominance by females makes the difference for bonobos, because female dominance differs from male dominance. Female bonobos use their power to maintain peace.

