Sometimes you are left alone somewhere on the mountain, waiting for the others, alone in the silence. Skylarks rise, ascending in song. Sometimes there are moments when not a sheep or a man can be seen. Away in the distance you can see the main roads and the villages. No one really knows how long this fell gathering has been happening, but quite possibly for as many as five thousand years. image

Beneath my feet and all around me is the rough mountainous grazing land. Traditionally, Lake District farms like ours had common grazing rights for a set number of sheep on the common belonging to their manor. The numbers were fixed by custom and communal management to reflect the grazing capacity of the fell and the winter grazing capacity of the farms down below. This was, and is, a system that requires rules and customs to prevent abuse, cheating or mismanagement. Before mobile phones or email, the only way that people could work collectively to manage this land was to have agreed traditions and practices – making it clear what everyone was supposed to do, when and how. There were even manorial courts to punish wrongdoing with fines, a practice that still exists through the commoners’ associations. We collect stray sheep from each other at our shepherds’ meet in November, or we are fined by the other commoners. Travelling by road from one side of a common to the other to collect a stray can be a ninety-mile, or more, round trip. Some farms still have stocks on different commons, so some fell shepherds spend a lot of their lives gathering different fells. Some farm lads specialize in this kind of gathering as an extra way to earn their living, and have packs of sheepdogs for the work. There is a poetic fantasy that shepherds, and farmers, live a kind of isolated existence alone with nature. Wordsworth encouraged that idea, offering the world an image from his childhood of the shepherd alone in the fells with his dogs, at one with nature. At times this is physically true to life – men like my grandfather were sometimes alone with their sheep and the natural world. But it is equally true that shepherds don’t exist alone, culturally or economically. My grandfather had a field called the ‘Football Pitch’. There were enough young men working on the neighbouring farms that they could muster two teams for a match. And his work was about dealing with, and ultimately impressing and earning the respect of, other people. Apparently the Bedouin can navigate the Sahara because they have an extensive knowledge of the dunes and sandy ridges, and even though these move slowly over time, they can count the ridges and know with a degree of accuracy where they are and how to get to where they are going. Our cultural navigation, our placing of ourselves and other people, works on a similar structural basis – if you understand the bones of it, you can navigate the detail. My grandfather and father could go just about anywhere in northern England and they’d usually know who farmed the land and often who had been there previously, or who farmed next door. The whole landscape here is a complex web of relationships between farms, flocks and families. My old man can hardly spell common words, but has an encyclopaedic knowledge of landscape. I think it makes a mockery of conventional ideas about who is and isn’t ‘intelligent’. Some of the smartest people I have ever known are semi-literate. If my grandfather could find out where someone farmed, the breeds of livestock they kept, and which auction mart they frequented, he could quickly find common ground with any farmer in the north of England, or even in the rest of the UK. He knew what everyone was likely to be doing at any given time of year. ‘Don’t bother going to see the Wilsons … They’ll be too busy dressing mule hoggs [the beautiful ewe lambs they sold each autumn for breeding on lowland farms] today,’ he’d say. And if you went to the farm over the hill that he was talking about, you’d see that he would be right. Long before anyone could have a credit ratings check, people here could quickly find out if someone new in the community was trustworthy or not: a few questions at an auction mart or at a show with someone from the person’s previous community, and their whole pedigree and track record would be passed on. So someone being accused of sheep-stealing is a matter of scandal, a dirty rumour that flows through the valleys. Recently, a well-respected Pennine farming family was accused of stealing sheep from many of their neighbours. The case has not been to court yet, and I have no way of judging whether it will end in a conviction or an acquittal – but the shockwaves it sent through the hill-farming community were profound. An old man we know who farms the same common had tears in his eyes when he told us about it, as if he couldn’t believe someone he trusted might be guilty of cutting out ear tags and sawing off horns with the burnt-on flock marks, and then stealing the sheep. There is an unwritten code of honour between shepherds. I remember my grandfather telling me about his friend buying some sheep privately from another farmer for what he thought was a fair price.