Their value is infinite in total. However, it is meaningful to ask how changes in the quantity or
quality of various types of natural capital and ecosystem services
may have an impact on human welfare. Such changes include both
small changes at large scales and large changes at small scales. For
example, changing the gaseous composition of the global atmosphere by a small amount may have large-scale climate change
effects that will affect the viability and welfare of global human
populations. Large changes at small scales include, for example,
dramatically changing local forest composition. These changes may
dramatically alter terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, having an
impact on the benefits and costs of local human activities. In
general, changes in particular forms of natural capital and ecosystem services will alter the costs or benefits of maintaining human
welfare. Valuation of ecosystem services
The issue of valuation is inseparable from the choices and decisions
we have to make about ecological systems6,8. Some argue that
valuation of ecosystems is either impossible or unwise, that we
cannot place a value on such ‘intangibles’ as human life, environmental aesthetics, or long-term ecological benefits. But, in fact, we
do so every day. When we set construction standards for highways,
bridges and the like, we value human life (acknowledged or not)
because spending more money on construction would save lives. Another frequent argument is that we should protect ecosystems for
purely moral or aesthetic reasons, and we do not need valuations of
ecosystems for this purpose. But there are equally compelling moral
arguments that may be in direct conflict with the moral argument to
protect ecosystems; for example, the moral argument that no one
should go hungry. Moral arguments translate the valuation and
decision problem into a different set of dimensions and a different
language of discourse6
; one that, in our view, makes the problem of
valuation and choice more difficult and less explicit. But moral and
economic arguments are certainly not mutually exclusive. Both
discussions can and should go on in parallel. So, although ecosystem valuation is certainly difficult and fraught
with uncertainties, one choice we do not have is whether or not to
do it. Rather, the decisions we make as a society about ecosystems
imply valuations (although not necessarily expressed in monetary
terms). We can choose to make these valuations explicit or not; we
can do them with an explicit acknowledgement of the huge
uncertainties involved or not; but as long as we are forced to
make choices, we are going through the process of valuation. The exercise of valuing the services of natural capital ‘at the
margin’ consists of determining the differences that relatively small
changes in these services make to human welfare. Changes in quality
or quantity of ecosystem services have value insofar as they either
change the benefits associated with human activities or change the
costs of those activities. These changes in benefits and costs either
have an impact on human welfare through established markets or
through non-market activities. For example, coral reefs provide
habitats for fish. One aspect of their value is to increase and
concentrate fish stocks. One effect of changes in coral reef quality
or quantity would be discernible in commercial fisheries markets, or
in recreational fisheries. But other aspects of the value of coral reefs,
such as recreational diving and biodiversity conservation, do not
show up completely in markets. Forests provide timber materials
through well established markets, but the associated habitat values
of forests are also felt through unmarketed recreational activities. The chains of effects from ecosystem services to human welfare can
range from extremely simple to exceedingly complex. Forests
provide timber, but also hold soils and moisture, and create
microclimates, all of which contribute to human welfare in complex, and generally non-marketed ways. Valuation methods
Various methods have been used to estimate both the market and
non-market components of the value of ecosystem services9–16. In
this analysis, we synthesized previous studies based on a wide
variety of methods, noting the limitations and assumptions underlying each. Many of the valuation techniques used in the studies covered in
our synthesis are based, either directly or indirectly, on attempts to
estimate the ‘willingness-to-pay’ of individuals for ecosystem services. For example, if ecological services provided a $50 increment
to the timber productivity of a forest, then the beneficiaries of this
service should be willing to pay up to $50 for it. In addition to
timber production, if the forest offered non-marketed, aesthetic,
existence, and conservation values of $70, those receiving this nonmarket benefit should be willing to pay up to $70 for it. The totalvalue of ecological services would be $120, but the contribution to
the money economy of ecological services would be $50, the amount
that actually passes through markets. In this study we have tried to
estimate the total value of ecological services, regardless of whether
they are currently marketed. Figure 1 shows some of these concepts diagrammatically. Figure
1a shows conventional supply (marginal cost) and demand (marginal benefit) curves for a typical marketed good or service. The
value that would show up in gross national product (GNP) is the
market price p times the quantity q, or the area pbqc. There are three
other relevant areas represented on the diagram, however. The cost
of production is the area under the supply curve, cbq. The ‘producer
surplus’ or ‘net rent’ for a resource is the area between the market
price and the supply curve, pbc.