Widespread and rapid changes in the atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere and biosphere have occurred. Human-caused climate change is already affecting many weather and climate extremes in every region across the globe. This has led to widespread adverse impacts and related losses and damages to nature and people (high confidence). Vulnerable communities who have historically contributed the least to current climate change are disproportionately affected (high confidence.
 It is unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, ocean and land. Global mean sea level increased by 0.20 [0.15 to 0.25] m between 1901 and 2018. The average rate of sea level rise was 1.3 [0.6 to 2.1] mm yr-1 between 1901 and 1971, increasing to 1.9 [0.8 to 2.9] mm yr-1 between 1971 and 2006, and further increasing to 3.7 [3.2 to 4.2] mm yr-1 between 2006 and 2018 (high confidence). Human influence was very likely the main driver of these increases since at least 1971. Evidence of observed changes in extremes such as heatwaves, heavy precipitation, droughts, and tropical cyclones, and, in particular, their attribution to human influence, has further strengthened since AR5. Human influence has likely increased the chance of compound extreme events since the 1950s, including increases in the frequency of concurrent heatwaves and droughts.
Approximately 3.3 to 3.6 billion people live in contexts that are highly vulnerable to climate change. Human and ecosystem vulnerability are interdependent. Regions and people with considerable development constraints have high vulnerability to climatic hazards. Increasing weather and climate extreme events have exposed millions of people to acute food insecurity and reduced water security, with the largest adverse impacts observed in many locations and/or communities in Africa, Asia, Central and South America, LDCs, Small Islands and the Arctic, and globally for Indigenous Peoples, small-scale food producers and low-income households. Between 2010 and 2020, human mortality from floods, droughts and storms was 15 times higher in highly vulnerable regions, compared to regions with very low vulnerability. 
Climate change has caused substantial damages, and increasingly irreversible losses, in terrestrial, freshwater, cryospheric, and coastal and open ocean ecosystems (high confidence). Hundreds of local losses of species have been driven by increases in the magnitude of heat extremes (high confidence) with mass mortality events recorded on land and in the ocean (very high confidence). Impacts on some ecosystems are approaching irreversibility such as the impacts of hydrological changes resulting from the retreat of glaciers, or the changes in some mountain (medium confidence) and Arctic ecosystems driven by permafrost thaw.
Climate change has reduced food security and affected water security, hindering efforts to meet Sustainable
Development Goals (high confidence). Although overall agricultural productivity has increased, climate change has
slowed this growth over the past 50 years globally (medium confidence), with related negative impacts mainly in midand low latitude regions but positive impacts in some high latitude regions (high confidence). Ocean warming and
ocean acidification have adversely affected food production from fisheries and shellfish aquaculture in some oceanic
regions (high confidence). Roughly half of the world’s population currently experience severe water scarcity for at least
part of the year due to a combination of climatic and non-climatic drivers (medium confidence). 
In all regions increases in extreme heat events have resulted in human mortality and morbidity (very high confidence).
The occurrence of climate-related food-borne and water-borne diseases (very high confidence) and the incidence
of vector-borne diseases (high confidence) have increased. In assessed regions, some mental health challenges are
associated with increasing temperatures (high confidence), trauma from extreme events (very high confidence), and
loss of livelihoods and culture (high confidence). Climate and weather extremes are increasingly driving displacement
in Africa, Asia, North America (high confidence), and Central and South America (medium confidence), with small island
states in the Caribbean and South Pacific being disproportionately affected relative to their small population size (high
confidence). 
Climate change has caused widespread adverse impacts and related losses and damages to nature and people that are
unequally distributed across systems, regions and sectors. Economic damages from climate change have been detected
in climate-exposed sectors, such as agriculture, forestry, fishery, energy, and tourism. Individual livelihoods have been
affected through, for example, destruction of homes and infrastructure, and loss of property and income, human health and food security, with adverse effects on gender and social equity. 
In urban areas, observed climate change has caused adverse impacts on human health, livelihoods and key infrastructure. Hot extremes have intensified in cities. Urban infrastructure, including transportation, water, sanitation and energy systems have been compromised by extreme and slow-onset events, with resulting economic losses, disruptions of services and negative impacts to well-being. Observed adverse impacts are concentrated amongst economically and socially marginalised urban residents.
Adaptation planning and implementation has progressed across all sectors and regions, with documented benefits and varying effectiveness. Despite progress, adaptation gaps exist, and will continue to grow at current rates of implementation. Hard and soft limits to adaptation have been reached in some ecosystems and regions. Maladaptation is happening in some sectors and regions. Current global financial flows for adaptation are insufficient for, and constrain implementation of, adaptation options, especially in developing countries (high confidence). Progress in adaptation planning and implementation has been observed across all sectors and regions, generating multiple benefits (very high confidence). Growing public and political awareness of climate impacts and risks has resulted in at least 170 countries and many cities including adaptation in their climate policies and planning processes (high confidence). Effectiveness of adaptation in reducing climate risks is documented for specific contexts, sectors and regions (high confidence). Examples of effective adaptation options include: cultivar improvements, on-farm water management and storage, soil moisture conservation, irrigation, agroforestry, community-based adaptation, farm and landscape level diversification in agriculture, sustainable land management approaches, use of agroecological principles and practices and other approaches that work with natural processes (high confidence). Ecosystem-based adaptation.
