We will halt the decline in our biodiversity so we can achieve thriving plants and wildlife.
This is a large task but we have already started: we have created or restored wildlife habitats the size of Dorset, we are investing more than £750 million in tree-planting and peatland restoration through our Nature for Climate Fund, and we have established a network of marine protected areas across 35,000 square miles of English waters.
We have also driven action on the global stage, reflecting that restoring nature is not just a national endeavour but also international: at UN Nature Summit COP15, we agreed a new Global Biodiversity Framework, with 23 global targets, including 30% of global land and 30% of global ocean to be protected by 2030. And our goals and targets at home will support progress towards the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals internationally.
To make further progress, we will:
launch the Species Survival Fund to create, enhance and restore habitats.
create, restore, and extend around 70 areas for wildlife through projects including new National Nature Reserves, and the next rounds of the Landscape Recovery Projects.
protect 30% of our land and sea for nature through the Nature Recovery Network and enhanced protections for our marine protected areas. We intend to designate the first Highly Protected Marine Areas this year.
implement the Environment Act 2021, including rolling out Local Nature Recovery Strategies to identify areas to create and restore habitat, and Biodiversity Net Gain to enhance the built environment.
support a transformation in the management of 70% of our countryside by incentivising farmers to adopt nature friendly farming practices.
publish an updated Green Finance Strategy, setting out the steps we are putting in place to leverage in private finance to deliver against these goals. We have a goal to raise at least £500 million per year of private finance into nature’s recovery by 2027 and more than £1 billion by 2030.
To restore nature, we will need to improve the quality of our environment. Three of the 25YEP goals, in particular, are critical for this. Firstly, we will aim to achieve clean air.
Air quality in the UK has improved significantly in recent decades, but it continues to be the biggest environmental risk to human health and a source of harm to the natural environment.
cut overall air pollution by tackling the key sources of emissions, including reducing the maximum limits for domestic burning appliances in Smoke Control Areas.
tackle specific hotspots by challenging councils to improve air quality more quickly, while supporting them with clear guidance, funding, and tools.
reduce ammonia emissions (crucial for sensitive natural habitats) by using incentives in our new farming schemes, investing £13 million in slurry storage infrastructure in 2023 and considering expanding environmental permitting conditions to dairy and intensive beef farms.
A healthy environment also relies on clean and plentiful water. The public expects better from our water environment, from clean drinking water to its use for crops and bathing waters.
tackle nutrient pollution, including by upgrading 160 wastewater treatment works by 2027 and providing increased advice and incentives to support a shift to sustainable agricultural techniques.
restore 400 miles of river through the first round of Landscape Recovery projects and establish 3,000 hectares of new woodlands along England’s rivers.
roll out water efficiency labelling across appliances and ensure water companies deliver a 50% reduction in leakages by 2050.
We will also need to continue managing exposure to chemicals and pesticides. These are an important part of a productive economy and sustainable food production, but they can place significant pressures on our environment across land and sea. Both were areas of EU regulation, so Brexit has provided an opportunity to review our approach.
develop a new Chemicals Strategy this year to establish our regulatory approach and priorities for the sustainable use of chemicals through UK REACH (Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals).
help farmers transition to Integrated Pest Management with investment and advice, utilising nature to tackle pests and reducing reliance on manufactured pesticides.
We will also have to improve how we use natural resources, which 2 of the goals aim to achieve. The resources on our island – indeed on our planet – are finite and precious. This is why we aim to maximise our resources and minimise our waste. The pandemic set us back in achieving this goal: household recycling fell and total waste increased as people needed new single-use products like facemasks and test kits. We need to get back to better habits, towards a truly circular and sustainable economy.
Climate change is a significant pressure on our environment. Leaving it in a better state than we found it cannot be achieved without mitigating and adapting to climate change.
The relationship is two-way: we also cannot mitigate and adapt to climate change without Nature-based Solutions.
To restore our biodiversity, we need to enhance our biosecurity. The risk of pests, pathogens, and invasive non-native species is increasing, as we have seen just this winter when the UK has experienced its largest outbreak of bird flu.
Our final goal is to enhance beauty, heritage, and engagement with the natural environment. We all understand that spending time in nature is part of what makes the United Kingdom such a special place. We want everyone to enjoy our landscapes and coastlines, but also recognise that to restore nature, we need to enjoy its beauty responsibly.

