The Sustainable Development Goals and the
2050 Vision for Biodiversity cannot be achieved
without transformative change, the conditions for
which can be put in place now. Increasing awareness of
interconnectedness in the context of the environmental crisis
and new norms regarding interactions between humans and
nature would support that change. In the short term (before 2030), all decision makers
could contribute to sustainability transformations, including
through enhanced and improved implementation and
enforcement of effective existing policy instruments and
regulations, and the reform and removal of harmful existing
policies and subsidies. Additional approaches, including landscape approaches, integrated
watershed and coastal zone management, marine spatial
planning, bioregional scale planning for energy, and new
urban planning paradigms offer opportunities to reconcile
multiple interests, values and forms of resource use, provided
that these cross-sectoral approaches recognize trade-offs
and uneven power relations between stakeholders.
Transformative change is facilitated by
innovative governance approaches that incorporate
existing approaches, such as integrative, inclusive,
informed and adaptive governance. While such
approaches have been extensively practised and
studied separately, it is increasingly recognized that
together, they can contribute to transformative
change. They help to
address governance challenges that are common to many 
sectors and policy domains and create the conditions for
implementing transformative change. Integrative measures are necessary to enable transformative change over the long term (up to 2050) to address the indirect drivers that are the root causes of the deterioration of nature, including changes in social, economic and technological structures within and across nations Sustainability transformations call for cross-sectoral thinking and approaches. Sectoral policies and measures can be effective in particular contexts, but often fail to account for indirect, distant and cumulative impacts, which can have adverse effects, including the exacerbation of inequalities. Cross-sectoral approaches, such as mainstreaming across government sectors, are focused on the relationships between sectors and policies and help to ensure policy coherence and effectiveness. Inclusive approaches help to reflect a plurality of values and ensure equity, including through equitable sharing of benefits arising from their use and rights-based approaches. Informed governance entails novel strategies for knowledge production and coproduction that are inclusive of diverse values and knowledge systems. Adaptive approaches, including learning from experience, monitoring and feedback loops, contribute to preparing for and managing the inevitable uncertainties and complexities associated with social and environmental changes.
summary of the evidence related to the components of pathways to sustainability suggests that there are five overarching types of management interventions, or levers, and eight leverage points that are key for achieving transformative change. The notion of levers and leverage points recognizes that complex global systems cannot be managed simply, but that in certain cases, specific interventions can be mutually reinforcing and can generate larger-scale changes towards achieving shared goals. For example, changes in laws and policies can enable and underpin changes in resource management and consumption, and in turn, changes in individual and collective behaviour and habits can facilitate the implementation of policies and laws Changes towards sustainable production and consumption and towards reducing and transforming residues and waste, particularly changes in consumption among the affluent, is recognized by some individuals and communities worldwide as central to sustainable development and reducing inequalities. While actual reductions have been limited, actions already being taken at different levels can be improved, coordinated and scaled up. Those include introducing and improving standards, systems and relevant regulations aimed at internalizing the external costs of production, extraction and consumption (such as pricing wasteful or polluting practices, including through penalties); promoting resource efficiency and circular and other economic models; voluntary environmental and social certification of market chains; and incentives that promote sustainable practices and innovation. Importantly, they also involve a change in the definition of what a good quality of life entails – decoupling the idea of a good and meaningful life from ever-increasing material consumption. All those approaches are more effective when they are mutually reinforcing. Actions that help to voluntarily unleash existing social values of responsibility in the form of individual, collective and organizational actions towards sustainability can have a powerful and lasting effect in shifting behaviour and cultivating stewardship as a normal social practice. 
Expanding and effectively managing the current network of protected areas, including terrestrial, freshwater and marine areas, is important for safeguarding biodiversity, particularly in the context of climate change. Conservation outcomes also depend on adaptive governance, strong societal engagement, effective and equitable benefit-sharing mechanisms, sustained funding, and monitoring and enforcement of rules. National Governments play a central role in supporting primary research, effective conservation and the sustainable use of multi-functional landscapes and seascapes. This entails planning their parties; and (g) promoting sustainable, biodiversity-based food systems.
Feeding the world in a sustainable manner,
especially in the context of climate change and
population growth, entails food systems that ensure
adaptive capacity, minimize environmental impacts,
eliminate hunger, and contribute to human health and
animal. Pathways to sustainable food systems entail
land-use planning and sustainable management of
both the supply/producer and the demand/consumer
sides of food systems.
Options for sustainable agricultural production
are available and continue to be developed, with some
having more impacts on biodiversity and ecosystem
functions than others. These options include
integrated pest and nutrient management, organic
agriculture, agroecological practices, soil and water
conservation practices, conservation agriculture,
agroforestry, silvopastoral systems, irrigation management,
small or patch systems and practices to improve animal
welfare. These practices could be enhanced through
well-structured regulations, incentives and subsidies, the
removal of distorting subsidies
, and – at landscape scales – by integrated landscape
planning and watershed management. Ensuring the
adaptive capacity of food production entails the use of
measures that conserve the diversity of genes, varieties,
cultivars, breeds, landraces and species, which also
contributes to diversified, healthy and culturally-relevant
nutrition. 

