the delivery of sufficient, healthy, nutritious food that does
not damage nature.
The current eco-agri-food systems complex impacts
both on human health and on the natural environment
in detrimental ways; it is now the source of 60 per cent
of terrestrial biodiversity loss, 24 per cent of greenhouse
gas emissions, 33 per cent of soil degradation and 61 per
cent of the depletion of commercial fish stocks (UNEP
2016). For example, failures in access and distribution
contribute to the fact that 800 million people in developing
countries consume less than the 2,100 kilocalories of
food recommended by the World Food Programme whilst
at the same time 1.9 billion people in the developed world
consume more than 3,000 calories a day (FAO 2015). This
imbalance also has wider ramifications. The impact of
undernutrition across Africa and Asia is estimated at 11
per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) annually (IFPRI
2016). Similarly, one in four adults are now overweight or
obese, with obesity behind many of the chronic diseases
that are sweeping the globe, from type 2 diabetes to heart
disease. The World Health Organization has estimated
the direct costs of diabetes alone at more than US$827
billion per year globally (WHO 2016).
The TEEBAgriFood Interim Report reflects on the role that
agriculture plays in providing employment for around 1.3
billion people in a world that is already short of around
200 million jobs (ILO 2015). One billion of these jobs
are in small-holder agriculture (less than 2 hectares)
so it is important to address how society could provide
alternative livelihoods for as many as 500 million more
people if the concentration and mechanization of
agribusinesses continues.
These are impacts on a global scale, yet in spite of the fact
they are all connected to the same process (producing
and consuming food), they have not yet been evaluated
as an entire system, using a systems approach.
From a human health perspective, the Global Panel
on Agriculture and Food Systems for Nutrition (2016)
includes a call to scientists, governments and donors to
work out how to craft and sustain food systems to provide
nutritious diets for all. The report authors highlight
that SDG 2 (zero hunger) and SDG 3 (good health and
wellbeing) cannot be achieved with piecemeal action: “the
trends are so large and so interconnected that the entire
system needs overhauling” (Haddad et al. 2016, p.31). The
emergence of initiatives such as The Food and Land-Use
Coalition (FOLU) , the International Panel of Experts on
Sustainable Food Systems (IPES-Food) and the High Level
Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition (HLPE) ,
each of which aims to bring together change agents in
this space, shows that decision-makers understand the
need for change and are ready to act.
Similarly, the emergence of the planetary health agenda,
which is building a better understanding of the ramifications
of environmental change on human livelihoods, pushes the
need for more resilient food and agricultural systems that
address both undernutrition and overnutrition, reduction
of waste, diversification of diets, and minimization
of environmental damage. The impacts arising from
feedbacks in the system from our current behaviour are
likely to be profound. The Lancet Commission on Planetary
Health’s report (Whitmee et al. 2015) estimated climate
change will result in 250,000 additional deaths between
2030 and 2050, that soil degradation leads to the loss of
1–2 million hectares of agricultural land every year, and
that by 2050 40 per cent of the world’s population could be
living in areas under severe water stress. The connections
to food systems are clear, especially in terms of some of
the identified solutions for a healthier planet - reducing
food waste, halting deforestation, using water more
efficiently and supporting healthier, lower environmental
impact diets.
The need to bring together the environment, human
health and human development agendas is increasingly
evident. This is illustrated neatly by the impact of Kate
Raworth’s recent book Doughnut Economics: Seven Ways
to Think Like a 21st-Century Economist (Raworth 2017)
which aims to define both an environmentally-safe
and socially-just space for humanity and assess how
economies need to change to achieve this. This builds on
the notion of planetary boundaries and the safe operating
space within which human systems can operate, with its
accompanying environmental limits. Juxtaposing this
with factors which can cause human deprivation can
be useful in assessing options to allow people to thrive
within the limits of the planet. This thinking is very much
embedded within the holistic approach advocated in this
current TEEBAgriFood report.
Irrespective of the particular socio-economic, cultural
and ecological context in which a particular eco-agri-food
system is situated, there are always positive and negative
externalities and impacts across the entire value chain,
i.e. from production, through processing and transport, to
final consumption. The question is thus not whether such
externalities and impacts exist but rather their extent,
which agents in society are affected, and whether we
can promote a decision-making environment in which the
positive impacts flourish and the negatives are mitigated. 
