Human-driven changes in species diversity within local ecological communities vary widely, depending on the net balance between species loss and the influx of alien species, disturbancetolerant species, other human-adapted species or climate migrant species (well established) {2.2.5.2.3}. Even though human-dominated landscapes are sometimes species-rich, their species composition is markedly altered from that in natural landscapes (well established) {2.2.5.2.3, 2.2.7.10, 2.2.7.11}. As a result of human-caused changes in community composition, naturally occurring species in local terrestrial ecosystems worldwide are estimated to have lost at least 20 per cent of their original abundance on average, with hotspots of endemic species tending to have lost even more (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.3}. The traits of species influence whether they persist or even thrive in human-modified ecosystems (well established) {2.2.3.6, 2.2.5.2.5}. For example, species that are large, grow slowly, are habitat specialists or are carnivores – such as great apes, tropical hardwood trees, sharks and big cats – are disappearing from many areas. Many other species, including those with opposite characteristics, are becoming more abundant locally and are spreading quickly around the world; across a set of 21 countries with detailed records, the numbers of invasive alien species per country have risen by some 70 per cent since 1970 {2.2.5.2.3}. The effects of invasive alien species are often particularly severe for the native species and assemblages on islands and in other settings with high proportions of endemic species (well established) {2.2.3.4.1, 2.2.5.2.3}. Invasive alien species can have devastating effects on mainland assemblages as well: for example, a single invasive pathogen species, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis, is a threat to nearly 400 amphibian species worldwide and has already caused a number of extinctions (well established) {2.2.5.2.3}. Many drivers add already widespread species to ecological communities in many places; and many drivers cause endemic species to decline in many places. These two processes have contributed to the widespread erosion of differences between ecological communities in different places, a phenomenon known as biotic homogenization or the “anthropogenic blender” (well established) {2.2.5.2.3}. The consequences of all these changes for ecosystem processes and hence nature’s contributions to people can be very significant. For example, the decline and disappearance of large herbivores and predators has dramatically affected the structure, fire regimes, seed dispersal, land surface albedo and nutrient availability within many ecosystems (well established) {2.2.5.2.1}. However, the consequences of changes often depend on details of the ecosystem, remain hard to predict and are still understudied (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.3}. 9 Many organisms show ongoing biological evolution so rapid that it is detectable within only a few years or even more quickly – in response to anthropogenic drivers (well established) {2.2.5.2.5, 2.2.5.2.6}. Management decisions that take those evolutionary changes into account will be noticeably more effective (established but incomplete) {Box 2.5}. This human-driven contemporary evolution, which has long been recognized in microbes, viruses, agricultural insect pests and weeds (well established), is now being observed in some species within all major taxonomic groups (animals, plants, fungi and microorganisms). Such changes are known to occur in response to human activities or drivers, such as hunting, fishing, harvesting, climate change, ocean acidification, soil and water pollution, invasive species, pathogens, pesticides and urbanization (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.5}. However, management strategies typically assume that evolutionary changes occur only over much longer time periods and thus ignore rapid evolution. These policy considerations span many spheres in which management actions designed to slow or speed evolution can dramatically change outcomes, as the following examples indicate. Insects, weeds and pathogens evolve resistance to insecticides, herbicides and other control agents, yet management strategies such as refuges, crop rotation, and crop diversity can dramatically slow that undesirable evolution (well established) {Box 2.5}. Commercial fish populations have evolved to mature earlier under intensive harvesting, which sometimes can be minimized by mandating changes in fishing gear or fish size limits (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.5}. Climate change favours the evolution of seasonally earlier reproduction in many organisms, which can in principle be facilitated through the introduction of individuals from populations already adapted to such conditions (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.5}. Mosquitoes rapidly evolve resistance to efforts to control them, but evolutionarily informed management actions can dramatically slow that undesirable evolution (established but incomplete) {2.2.5.2.5}. Contemporary evolution is thus relevant to many policy concerns. Understanding and working with contemporary evolution can address important concerns surrounding pollination and dispersal, coral persistence in the face of ocean acidification, water quality, pest regulation, food production and options for the future (established but incomplete). The specific actions taken will typically be case-specific and therefore will require careful assessment of evolutionary potential and consequences. In many cases, the best strategy could be to simply maintain the ability of natural populations to respond evolutionarily on their own – rather than through direct human manipulation of evolution.
Today, humans extract more from the Earth and produce more waste than ever before (well established). Globally, land-use change is the direct driver with the largest relative impact on terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems, while direct exploitation of fish and seafood has the largest relative impact in the oceans (well established) (Figure SPM.2) {2.2.6.2}. Climate change, pollution and invasive alien species have had a lower relative impact to date but are accelerating (established but incomplete) {2.2.6.2, 3.2, 4.2}. Although the pace of agricultural expansion into intact ecosystems {2.1.13} has varied from country to country, losses of intact ecosystems have occurred primarily in the tropics, home to the highest levels of biodiversity on the planet (for example, 100 million hectares of tropical forest from 1980 to 2000), due to cattle ranching in Latin America (~42 million ha) and plantations in South-East Asia (~7.5 million hectares, 80 per cent in oil palm) among others {2.1.13}, noting that plantations can also increase total forest area. 
