Re-establishing the hydrological function of a peatland is a fundamental part of its restoration; nearly all the land returned through the survey required actions to manage the water table (figure 7). The DM stakeholder workshops generated a narrative vision of peatland restoration progress by 2050 where “pioneering and dynamic methods are used in water management leading to functioning water tables that support restoration” (see Annex 2). The challenge to creating wetter conditions varies with peatland type and the reasons for degradation. In the lowland context, many peatlands have been drained for agricultural use (Evans et al., 2016) and in the larger lowland peatlands water levels are typically managed by a combination of Internal Drainage Boards (IDBs), the Environment Agency and local authorities. The influence of both surface and groundwater in the lowlands leads to additional complications in terms of water management. The interconnectedness of water across these landscape means that, whilst beyond the scope of this project, fen and bog restoration in some lowland settings needs to be considered as part of the management continuum of peatlands including conventional and wet agriculture and paludiculture. This also reflects the LAPTF Chair’s Report which stated that “opportunities for restoration and more sustainable management should be explored in parallel to drive the best results for peat at a landscape scale”. Changes to the way water is managed in the future was highlighted in the DM workshops, where participants reported an “expectation that IDBs shift focus from drained to water management and rewetting” (see Annex 2). Assessment of the legal protection and powers for managing water for carbon, including the role of IDBs, is a recommendation from the LAPTF and current research within Defra group is considering what this may look like. Recent government schemes have supported exploring changes to water management in lowland peatlands; the Lowland Agricultural Peat Small-Infrastructure Pilot (LAPSIP) funded changes to water level management in the lowlands for the preservation of peat soils. Whilst the scheme focused on the retention of higher water levels in agricultural peat soils, the installation of water control structures and monitoring equipment could have a direct impact on restoration initiatives within their locality (LAPSIP Final Report, 2025). The DM workshops highlighted practical challenges around the need to understand water movement better in the lowlands and the availability of water when there are competing demands such as from farming, domestic use and industry. Concerns within the workshops were also raised around insurance and liability regarding standing water (see Annex 2). The Lakenheath Fen case study provided by the Fens East Peat Partnership demonstrates the complicated nature of retaining water onsite for rewetting peatlands whilst arable agriculture requiring deep drainage continues on the same peat body (annex 3 – case study 1 and 6). The re-routing and blocking of ditches in the project enabled seepage water that would have been lost, to be retained within the nature reserve, meaning water losses are now only via evapotranspiration. Further to this, water can also be moved around the site to optimise water levels for the target habitats. Working with partners and reaching agreements about appropriate management was identified as an action in 35% of land in the lowlands returned through the survey. Collaborative working was also identified as a key requirement to achieve water management across multiple land holdings in the DM workshops, specifically bringing landowners, regulatory bodies and IDBs together at early stages to develop restoration plans. Support for partnerships to develop water management plans for lowland peat areas in England was provided through the Lowland Agricultural Peat Water Discovery Pilot (LAPWDP) from 2024 – 2026. Building on collaborative working with a culture of learning and innovation was also identified as a key focus area from the DM workshops. Knowledge sharing can take a range of forms, for example NCPGS projects across the lowlands have hosted site visits for both practitioners and local communities to share lessons learned and successes during the lifetime of the scheme. PEF has also facilitated knowledge sharing and similarly with LAPSIP and LAPWDP, whilst not the focus, opportunities to support peatland restoration have been created. For example, in January 2025, the Broads Authority published a Design Guide to support water table and water resource management in the Broads National Park, the development of which was funded through PEF. This resource is aimed at farmers and landowners interested in restoring degraded lowland peat and covers the local water availability context as well as permissions required and potential engineering solutions. Common across restoration in both the uplands and lowlands is the need to understand the broader system context so that “restoration work is informed by how water flows and peatlands function in the landscape” in combination with increasing surface roughness through revegetation (see Annex 2). Whilst bog restoration techniques are generally well developed and documented (e.g. Conserving Bogs: The Management Handbook and the Peatland ACTION Technical Compendium), minor evidence gaps still remain as reflected in the survey data where almost 600 ha of land required actions to increase confidence in effectiveness of techniques in the uplands. Optimising restoration plans for integrated benefits, such as flood mitigation was highlighted in the DM stakeholder responses. Peatland restoration in the uplands can contribute to minimising flood risk through retaining water within headwaters and increasing surface roughness to ‘slow the flow’ of run-off downstream. This leads to a reduction in peak flow during rainfall events and increases the time it takes for water to reach watercourses. The recent Working with natural processes (WWNP) evidence review by Pearson et al. (2025) identified a medium confidence in the effect of headwater peatland management on flood risk due to the limited number of catchment-scale studies. Many studies show gully blocking diffuses run-off as water is forced to leave the system via numerous pathways, however the complexity of monitoring sub-catchment processes limits the applicability to different scales.