Hunting has a mix of drivers – food, exotic
foods, trophies – all meeting human needs. Climate change is now very widely
accepted as anthropogenic. And the most destructive examples of loss through
invasive alien species are by-products of human intervention, be it deliberate
(cane toads introduced in Australia) or accidental (chestnut borers from a
Chinese chestnut introduced in America). Thus the root causes of biodiversity loss lie in the nature of the human
relationship with nature, and in our dominant economic model. We have not
widely understood that our survival depends on co-existence, on living in
harmony with nature. And in general, although there are many exceptions that
TEEB highlights, our dominant economic model promotes and rewards more
versus better consumption, private versus public wealth creation, human-made
capital versus natural capital. This is the ‘triple-whammy’ of self-reinforcing
biases that leads us to uphold and promote an economic model in which we
tend to extract without fear of limits, consume without awareness of
consequences and produce without responsibility for third-party costs, the
so-called ‘externalities’ of business. Of course, we would not adopt any such damaging behaviours if our
relationship with nature were one of co-existence and responsible stewardship,
as is still the case with some forest-dependent tribal communities. However,
increasing urbanization, which creates both physical and emotional distance
from nature, and our dominant ‘take–make–waste’ economic model with its
inherent biases have long ago defeated that possibility. We now enter, in the

Preface  xix
words of Winston Churchill, a ‘period of consequences’. Ecological scarcities,
ecosystem degradation, biodiversity loss and climate change are affecting us
severely around the world, causing water and food shortages, socio-political
stress, economic damage and persistent poverty, as well as increasing the level
of ecological, social and economic risks that we as well as future generations
will have to manage in our search for well-being for all. The search for solutions
There is nowadays an increasing level of awareness that something is very
wrong, and that human society needs to change in fundamental ways in order
to solve any of the problems described above. From many directions, fingers are
being pointed at the recent economic crisis, itself a result of crises in fuel, food
and finance, and at the parallel crisis in our ecological and climate commons,
suggesting that both share a common cause: our failed economic model. Occasionally, some may conclude (e.g. WEF-GAC summit in Dubai,
November 2008) that our systems merely need a ‘reboot’, and that we do not
fundamentally need to change. Many other voices however are arguing for
trenchant changes in society and its economic model. There is also a growing
view among mainstream political leadership that both the dominant economic
model and the accounts of society are in need of serious change (Barosso,
Athens, April 2009; Brown, London, July 2009; Sarkozy, Paris, September
2009). More and more frequently we hear of the need to reform society in
fundamental ways: to include natural and human capital formation and
destruction in the accounts of society; to expand the reach of markets in order
to enable payments for ecosystem services; to tax what we take (resources) and
not what we make (profits from goods and services); and so on. These are all
big changes, each of which would address the ‘root causes’ of biodiversity loss
and ecosystem degradation. The challenge, as always, is change and its many dimensions: its nature, its
extent and scale, its speed and its unintended consequences. TEEB’s review and
synthesis of the literature on the economics of ecosystems and biodiversity, our
key messages, and our recommendations to end-users are all intended to be a
part of that change. Our approach in recommending changes is to favour pragmatism over
perfectionism, discrete planned changes over ‘creative destruction’ or other
adventurous alternatives, common sense and the principle of equity over ‘free
market fundamentalism’ (to borrow a phrase from George Soros), and solutions
that have an immediate start and a foreseeable medium-term outcome over
solutions that may take ages to negotiate and may not deliver results until after
it is too late. Observation and recognition of the value of nature’s benefits to
society is at the heart of our recommended solutions. Economic valuation, in
particular, can help communicate the value of nature to diverse groups of
decision makers (TEEB refers to them as the ‘end-users’ of these economics)
using the language of the world’s dominant economic and political paradigm. This volume presents the ecological and economic foundations of TEEB. It will
be accompanied by four publications for ‘end-users’ – national and international 
policy makers (TEEB in National Policy, 2011), subnational policy makers and
administrators (TEEB in Local Policy, 2011), business and enterprise (TEEB in
Business, 2011) and the individual citizen (a website). The changing nature of knowledge, economics, valuations and accounts for
a changing society are common undercurrents that run through TEEB’s ‘enduser’ deliverables. Some reflection on each of these undercurrents is appropriate
to introduce TEEB.
Knowledge for a changing society
While TEEB authors have taken care to consult widely with scientists and
economists in order to present a synthesis of scientific knowledge we consider
to represent the ‘best-of-breed’ in each area explored, there is no avoiding the
fact that the state knowledge is incomplete. Our understanding of ecosystem
dynamics, of the links between biodiversity and ecosystem resilience, and of
how ecosystems behave when they are close to thresholds, are all areas of
imperfect understanding as of today.