Tree flora assessments were undertaken at all sites during winter and early spring 2023/ 2024 (Visit 1). Winter is a good time to do surveys of most bryophyte and lichen species as the high atmospheric moisture content means that the bodies of the plants are fully hydrated and therefore relatively easy to identify, despite the fact that many will not have fruiting bodies present. Note transects and plots were located using GPS, but individual trees were not marked during the winter tree flora assessments so location of ground quadrats for the second round of surveys were not related to specific trees. A consideration was to take account of wind direction because it might be expected for atmospheric eutrophication to travel further downwind of a source. This however proved to be an unrealistic site requirement. As a result, the pen was usually but not always, up-wind of the very large area of woodland which could contain our 500m transect and also avoided all other game management hotspots (which was seen as essential). This was checked in analysis (i.e., whether orientation affected tree flora data). At each study site, having located the study pen and potential transect route, the first tree at sample point A was randomly selected as one meeting the species type and minimum diameter criteria (see details below). This was at a distance approximately halfway along the release pen edge and 5-10m out from the actual pen fence (to avoid construction aspects of the pen). The other four points at A were selected by walking 15 paces from the central tree in each of the four compass/ cardinal directions and using the nearest suitable tree (species & size) to survey. Tree flora (selected bryophytes and lichens) assessments involved locating quadrats at fixed height on the trunk of firstly the central tree and then on one tree at each of the other four points in each sampling plot (located and defined as before) in accordance with the methods in Sage (2018a), meaning five trees altogether. It was essential the trees themselves were not selected visually - the protocol for selection is given below. The same survey method was repeated along the transect route at points B to E with the central tree being randomly assigned at the relevant distance from the release pen. At each selected survey point the Air Pollution Information System (APIS) - Monitoring Air Quality Using Lichens – ‘field guide and app’ method was employed. Firstly, suitable tree species were identified (preferably oak spp. and birch spp. but if these were not present, rowan (Sorbus aucuparia), alder (Alnus glutinosa), beech (Fagus sylvatica), lime (Tilia spp.) or ash (Fraxinus excelsior) could be used growing under similar environmental conditions (not densely planted or shaded)). These are all relatively acid-barked trees (tree bark in order of reducing acidity: birch, oak (pH 3.8-5.8), rowan, alder, beech, lime, ash (pH 5.2-6.6), elder, sycamore and field maple, apple, poplar, willow and elm (pH 4.7-7.1)). Secondly, trees with a high cover of Ivy (Hedera helix) i.e., where it largely obscured the tree trunk and potentially made locating quadrats difficult, were not used unless there were no alternatives. Wherever possible, selected trees were single stemmed (standard) with a straight trunk, > 40 cm in circumference or girth (ca 13 cm diameter). Site and plot location, grid reference and altitude were recorded. Thirdly, the three aspects (E, S and W using a compass) on the trunks to be surveyed were selected using a hand-held compass and a 50 x 10cm area on each of the three aspects of the tree between 1.0 and 1.5 m above ground level was delineated using a quadrat. Fourthly, presence and % cover of N-sensitive and Ntolerant species growing between 1m and 1.5m above ground level on each of the three aspects (E, S and W) within the 50 x 10cm area were recorded (Figure 2.3). Presence and % cover of lichens listed in the APIS guide and any of the six indicator bryophytes within the quadrat were recorded: The four highly N-tolerant and two highly N-sensitive bryophyte species selected were deemed to be sufficiently widely distributed and hence likely to occur across the survey area. They were selected in consultation with Natural England’s National Bryophyte Specialist and added to the standard list of lichens to be recorded. Cover (%) of the most abundant species of lichens and bryophytes were also recorded (if not identifiable in the field, notes were made on its characteristics). The four stages were repeated for each of the five trees.
A quadrat designed and constructed to consistently record epiphytes on the trees was used throughout the survey. In addition to the indicator species all identifiable bryophytes and lichens were recorded in the survey if they occurred at sufficient abundance to influence the lower plant community. These were not however, incorporated in the analysis but will potentially provide additional data for community characterisation.
The effect of distance from release pen on the number of pheasants detected during surveys differed between the winter and summer, Visit 1 and Visit 2 (Distance x Season: χ2 4 = 18.5, p = 0.001, Figure 3.1). The distance ticks on the x-axis relate to sampling plots A – E respectively, Plot A being circa 5-10m from the pen edge and Plot E being 1000m+ from the release pen (details given in section 2.3 in Methods). During the winter, the number of pheasants declined with distance from the pen, but during the summer there was no relationship, and the numbers detected were lower than during the winter. Overall, there were significantly fewer pheasants at the control site compared to just outside the pen (post-hoc contrast, p = 0.0011) with 8.2 times more gamebirds detected outside the pen compared to the control site during winter surveys.
