The quality and relevance of the outputs from this study depended on acquiring a group of representative sites that release pheasants into designated or sensitive woodland. Another key factor was to secure suitable control plots which had no gamebird release nearby and no game management. This phase of the study took several months in 2023. A theme of the sampling work was to look for accumulated effects of gamebird releasing on soils, ground flora, tree flora, and invertebrate resources, rather than transient effects. Consequently, ground flora, invertebrate related assessments and soil survey work were conducted during the spring and early summer, prior to gamebird releasing and dispersal. The main fieldwork programme started with preliminary visits to potential sites in summer 2023, followed by two major data collection episodes. The first in winter 2023/ 24, to do tree flora surveys and gamebird surveys, and then the second throughout spring and early summer 2024, to cover ground flora, tree seedlings, soil sampling, and the invertebrate related survey work, all completed before the next gamebird release in late summer 2024. The aim was to secure 20 suitable study sites, and this approach allowed time to identify, negotiate with and plan the fieldwork strategy on all of these sites and the control areas in spring and summer 2023, prior to initiating and completing the first fieldwork programme in winter 2023/ 2024. The basic sampling strategy for all parts of the fieldwork was to sample several large plots at increasing distance from a release pen and then a further control plot at greater distance. At each site, our approach was to avoid places where released gamebirds congregate. The study would therefore look at effects on designated or other ancient woodland sites adjacent to release sites but not close to feed points or alongside game crops or in any other places where pheasants are encouraged to congregate. Current evidence suggests that places where birds congregate will usually have negative effects for all the measures we would be recording and the relevance of distance to release pen would disappear (Madden and Sage, 2020). It was therefore necessary to have an understanding of game management activities on study sites before choosing transects and sampling locations. This was generally done through detailed discussions with landowners and/ or gamekeepers and, where possible a site visit, to determine the suitability of each site. Exact locations of game management activities were therefore known and recorded on site maps before transecting routes were finalised.
A key part of the survey work was to conduct gamebird counts at all sites alongside other habitat assessment work. The winter visits in particular allowed us to get an idea of numbers during the main usage period of woodlands by released pheasants and when we would be most likely to see a distribution of decreasing abundance with distance away from the pen. The work, especially during the winter shooting period in a pheasant release woodland is potentially intrusive to shoot owners/ game managers, so it was helpful to be able to undertake game counts alongside other habitat assessment work, thereby minimising visit number. Nevertheless, on several sites we were not allowed access during the shooting season, but we were able to extend the time plan for Visit 1 and do the survey in February or early March (as early as possible after shooting had finished, and access was permitted). The gamebird counts were carried out at all sites during both Visit 1 and Visit 2 using a standard non-vehicle count protocol (Sage, Woodburn & Coomes, 2025 in press). This involved recording all gamebirds seen or heard during habitat assessments, and/or while walking between sampling points, so typically over a one-two hour period. This provides no insight into actual numbers, but it does provide a crude index for comparison between plots within sites, which was the main purpose of the data collection. To carry out the main habitat assessments we deployed a sampling protocol in each plot along each transect, described in detail in section 2.6. This followed previous similar work undertaken in the Exmoor region (Sage, 2018a; Sage, 2018b). Each plot was a circle of approximately 50m in diameter within which five points were located in a stratified-random manner.
Prior to soil chemistry analyses (by University of Exeter) soil samples were processed at the GWCT, following a standard protocol supplied by the University. First, the soil samples were mixed up by hand in the plastic bag to ensure uniformity. Approximately 2.5g of fresh soil was removed from each bag, labelled, and reserved for soil nitrate analysis (kept in a fridge at 5° C). The remaining sample was placed in a constant temperature drying oven set at 50° C for ~60 hours, with the bags opened up but kept intact. Each sample was then weighed and put back into the drying oven for another 1-2 hours and re-weighed to make sure the samples were completely dry (constant weight reached). This process was repeated where necessary and bags re-sealed when samples were fully dried. Following the instructions in the protocol (Appendix 2, Section 6.2), each sample was then tipped into a 2mm (2000 micron) metal sieve over a collecting pot. Large stones, roots and other non-soil debris were removed. The remaining lumps of soil were then gently broken up in a large pestle & mortar. The sample was then sieved again using a metal spatula and stiff brush to help pass the soil through. Small stones and roots still not small enough to pass through the sieve were removed. Samples were re-bagged, labelled and stored in a fridge before delivery to the geography department at the University of Exeter, including the fresh soil samples. Soil chemistry analyses using specialised equipment were carried out there, specifically for nitrate, phosphate and potassium levels.
