Peatlands are the world’s largest terrestrial carbon store with a rich and unique biodiversity adapted over millennia to survive in waterlogged conditions. When healthy, they play an important role in water regulation, slowing the flow of water through catchments and providing clean drinking water. Peatlands cover approximately 10.9% of England but only an estimated 13% are in a near natural functioning state (Evans et al., 2017). Drainage, pollution and other damaging land uses have resulted in loss of characteristic vegetation, followed by drying and oxidation of peat, causing the direct loss of carbon that has accumulated and been stored within them for millennia. England’s peatlands currently account for 2% of the England’s total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (Brown et al., 2025) with carbon continually being lost while they remain drained. As well as this loss of carbon, drier conditions increase the risk of damaging preserved archaeology and the unique environmental archive recorded in the peat as it accumulated. Restoring peatlands is critical to reduce GHG emissions from land use and allow biodiversity to recover. The recovery to naturally functioning systems will also provide a range of co-benefits such as flood mitigation, water regulation and protection of cultural heritage. The Office for National Statistics estimates that the carbon benefits of restoring all UK peatlands would outweigh the costs by at least 5 to 1, with total climate change benefits estimated at £109 billion (ONS, 2019). Peatland restoration in a changing climate Protecting and restoring peatlands is one of the key Nature-based Solutions to deliver climate change mitigation (Gregg et al., 2021). However, their ability to deliver ecosystem services depends on their condition, with healthy peatlands delivering a greater range of services than damaged peatlands. The changing climate impacts all environmental systems and degraded systems, including degraded peatlands, are much more vulnerable to this change as they are already significantly damaged with reduced capacity to selfregulate and adapt. Their restoration should therefore be considered a priority to increase resilience to future change and prevent further damage and carbon losses (Gregg et al., 2021). Changing precipitation and temperature patterns due to climate change, including the increasing frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, will impact different types of peatlands in different ways across England. The success of restoration activities can be impacted, for example, drought slowing recovery of water levels, and the ability for vegetation to establish. Drier and warmer conditions also significantly increase the fire risk in peatlands, with climate change expected to increase the frequency and magnitude of fires (Glaves et al., 2020). Both blanket and raised bogs are considered to have high sensitivity to climate change (Staddon et al., 2023) and their natural capital benefits are at high risk (Lusardi et al., 2024). The hydrological damage to bogs means that they are particularly vulnerable to drying in warmer, drier summer conditions (Gregg et al., 2021), and their ability to store potentially greater winter rainfall is also compromised. Projections indicate that the area of the uplands suitable for peat-forming vegetation could decline by up to 65% by 2050 (CCC, 2021), whilst the distribution of active blanket bog may contract towards the north and west of the UK due to increasing summer temperatures (Gregg et al., 2021). Studies also suggest that pockets of peatland resilience may persist in other areas where Sphagnum cover is maintained (Gallego-Sala and Prentice, 2013) and longer growing seasons may occur through increased temperatures (Lunt et al., 2019). Degraded fens are also considered more sensitive to climate change than hydrologically intact fens (Staddon et al., 2023), especially to changes in water quality and quantity due to their reliance on local hydrological conditions. Fen habitats are at risk of drying out during drier conditions, however more frequent inundation due to changes in storm frequency and intensity is also possible (Gregg et al., 2021). The networks of drainage ditches in degraded fens are also vulnerable to both drying out and inundation due to changes in conditions, leading to increased GHG emissions and mobilisation of previously stored sediment (Gregg et al., 2021). Peatland restoration contribution to targets The ambition to have 280,000 ha of peatland under restoration by 2050 was first set out in the Net Zero Strategy (2021) and more recently in the Carbon Budget and Growth Delivery Plan (2025) and Environment Improvement Plan 2025. The Climate Change Committee recommends that peatland restoration accounts for 50% of the emissions savings in the land use sector by 2040, and 17% of the savings in the agriculture and land use sector (Carbon Budget 7, CCC, 2025). Restoration to natural functioning systems has significant impacts on carbon, hydrology and vegetation, therefore peatland restoration contributes to a number of the goals and commitments of the Environment Improvement Plan, in addition to the Environment Act 2021 and Climate Change Act 2008 requirements.
Peat is defined as a type of soil “formed from carbon rich dead and decaying plant material under waterlogged conditions” (Bain et al., 2011). There is no universally agreed definition of peat, with minimum thickness and organic matter content varying across countries and often linked to funding eligibility (IUCN UK Peatland Programme, 2023). Peaty soils are defined as a group of soil texture classes with at least 20% organic matter (see glossary of Final Report England Peat Map - NERR149). The England Peat Map (EPM) was published in May 2025 and provides the most up to date map of England’s peaty soils. The EPM uses an organic matter content threshold of 50% to define peat and does not propose a depth criteria for soils to be considered peat or peaty soils. It models the extent, depth and condition of peat including vegetation and upland peat erosion and drainage features. 
