. In the first half of 2024, the Statistics Division and OECD disseminated the results of the first global data collection of air emissions and physical energy flow accounts, which was initiated in 2023 to complement the data collection for European Statistical System countries by Eurostat. Several countries outside the European Statistical System responded to the global data collection on air emissions and physical energy flow accounts. 48. For the second round of global data collection, some adjustments were introduced to the questionnaires to better align with the Eurostat questionnaires and improve international comparability. Overall, responses to the 2024 round of data collection showed an improvement in the availability and granularity of the data reported as compared with the previous round of data collection. Data collected in the 2024 round will be disseminated in early 2025. 49. Along with the working group on coordination and communication, the working group on the development of global databases continues to coordinate with and contribute to the third phase of the Data Gaps Initiative (see also sect. IV.A). The global questionnaires on air emissions and physical energy flow accounts provide the templates for reporting on recommendations 1 and 2 of the Initiative. 50. UNEP continues to undertake work on material flow accounts through regular updates of the Global Material Flows Database, which covers more than 200 countries and territories for the period 1970–2024 and is one of the sources for indicators 8.4.1/12.2.1 (material footprint) and 8.4.2/12.2.2 (domestic material consumption) of the Sustainable Development Goals. In 2024, UNEP reported estimates of these indicators for non-European Union countries to the global Sustainable Development Goals database and asked these countries to validate estimates for domestic material consumption and, if possible, replace them with national data. After this review phase, data will be reported to the global database for the Goals in about March 2025.
For land cover accounts, the working group reviewed the draft questionnaire on land cover accounts which was developed by the OECD, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the Statistics Division in consultation with Eurostat, the European Environment Agency and the secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, in order to start piloting the questionnaire with selected countries towards the end of 2024. A feedback form was also developed to collect comments and suggestions national compilers may have on the questionnaire. In the pilot phase, OECD sent the pilot questionnaire to seven OECD member countries, while the Food and Agriculture Organization sent it to 17 member States, in coordination with the Statistics Division. The work on land cover accounts is coordinated with ongoing work on ecosystem extent accounts, for instance by Eurostat. Results of the pilot study are expected to be evaluated and reported to the Committee in 2025. 52. For water accounts, OECD initiated a study to assess the feasibility of compiling physical water flow accounts from available data sources, most notably from the joint OECD/Eurostat questionnaire on the state of the environment (inland waters) and the Statistics Division/UNEP questionnaires on environment statistics (water section), 7 and to identify ways to fill the gaps using model-based estimates. OECD and the Statistics Division will coordinate the feasibility study to ensure a global approach. In parallel, Eurostat intends to undertake a study for European Statistical System countries to assess the quality and completeness of available data and their fitness to develop water accounts on the quantity of water resources for human use (households, industry, agriculture). In addition, Eurostat plans to examine the possibility of using model-based estimates for the compilation of physical water flow accounts. A report will be prepared by the working group on the outcome of these feasibility studies and initial recommendations will be discussed at the Committee of Experts meeting in June 2025. The recommendations will consider both the feasibility of implementation as well as the link with the SEEA Ecosystem Accounts. 53. Recognizing that timely SEEA-based air emissions accounts with extensive country coverage can help in closely examining structural trends in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, Eurostat, the International Energy Agency, IMF, OECD and the Statistics Division collaborated to develop estimation techniques to produce quarterly GHG emissions data that aligns to the timeliness of quarterly gross domestic product statistics, utilizing available data as efficiently as possible. The methodology for these estimations is detailed in the IMF publication, Data for a Greener World: A Guide for Practitioners and Policymakers. Leveraging the work of this task team, IMF, Eurostat and OECD publish experimental SEEA-based quarterly GHG emissions accounts. 54. Looking ahead to the period beyond the current road map for 2021–2025, 8 which focuses on the five priority accounts, the working group started discussing possible priority accounts for the next road map starting in 2026. This includes a re-evaluation of the current priority accounts and the identification of potential new priority accounts. Priority accounts for the next five-year period (2026–2030) will be proposed at the next meeting of the Committee of Experts in 2025.
The working group coordinates capacity development activities at the global and regional levels, as well as ensures that lessons learned from SEEA implementation in countries are shared more widely. To ensure improved coordination of capacity-building activities, the Committee of Experts agreed to expand the membership of area D to include, among others, regional development banks, additional international organizations and other entities undertaking SEEA implementation activities, and countries. A summary of the main implementation activities by working group members is presented below. It should be noted that several members of the working group, in particular United Nations entities, continue to face resource constraints in conducting SEEA implementation activities due to the liquidity crisis, and hence their capacity-building efforts have been restricted in the past year.
