There has been significant underinvestment in such programmes. Addressing that shortfall, even
if the effects may not be apparent in the short-term, is essential. Conserving and restoring our natural assets will sustain and enhance their supply. It is less
costly to conserve Nature than to restore it once damaged or degraded, all else being equal. In
the face of significant risk and uncertainty about the consequences of degrading ecosystems,
in many cases there is a strong economic rationale for quantity restrictions over pricing
mechanisms. Expanding and improving the management of Protected Areas therefore has
an essential role to play. Multi-functional landscapes and seascapes that provide ecosystem
goods and services, and protect and enhance biodiversity, are also important. Large-scale and
widespread investment in Nature-based Solutions would help us to address biodiversity loss
and significantly contribute to climate change mitigation and adaptation, not to mention wider
economic benefits, including creating jobs. As part of fiscal stimulus packages in the wake of
COVID-19, investment in natural capital has the potential for quick returns. Moreover, natural
capital forms the bulk of wealth in low income countries, and those on low incomes tend to rely
more directly on Nature. And so conserving and restoring our natural assets also contributes to
alleviating poverty. (ii) Change our measures of economic success to guide us on a
more sustainable path. Nature needs to enter economic and finance decision-making in the same way buildings,
machines, roads and skills do. To do so ultimately requires changing our measures of economic
success. As a measure of economic activity, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is needed for
short-run macroeconomic analysis and management. However, GDP does not account for the
depreciation of assets, including the natural environment. As our primary measure of economic
success, it therefore encourages us to pursue unsustainable economic growth and development. The Review demonstrates that in order to judge whether economic development is sustainable,
an inclusive measure of wealth is needed. By measuring our wealth in terms of all assets,
including natural assets, ‘inclusive wealth’ provides a clear and coherent measure that
corresponds directly with the well-being of current and future generations. This approach
accounts for the benefits from investing in natural assets and illuminates the trade-offs and
interactions between investments in different assets. Introducing natural capital into national accounting systems would be a critical step towards
making inclusive wealth our measure of progress. Frameworks for natural capital accounting
and assessment exist and are at different stages of development, and while significant problems
of design and measurement remain, this should not deter governments and businesses from
supporting and embracing them. Increased investment in physical accounts and valuation
would improve the quality of natural capital accounts. Standardisation of data and modelling
approaches, and technical support, would make it easier to embed natural capital accounting in
national economic accounts, and, above all, use the information to improve decision-making at
scale around the world.
(iii) Transform our institutions and systems – in particular our
finance and education systems – to enable these changes and
sustain them for future generations. Information required for managing ecosystems is asymmetrically distributed: much is uniquely
understood and best managed by local communities, but important perspectives are also
held among national governments, international organisations and along global supply
chains. Institutional arrangements that enable sustainable engagement with ecosystems are
‘polycentric’. They pool knowledge and perspectives among and across different levels – global,
regional, national and local – and from different organisations, communities and individuals. In doing so, they enable relevant information to flow, and allow for collaborative planning,
participation and coordination. Ecosystems that are global public goods raise problems, the solutions for which transcend
national seats of governance. The Review points to the need for supra-national institutional
arrangements. There are two broad classes of cases to consider. For those ecosystems (biomes,
more accurately) that are located within national boundaries (for example, tropical rainforests),
a system of payments to nations for protecting the ecosystems on which we all rely should be
explored. For ecosystems that lie outside national boundaries (for example, the oceans beyond
exclusive economic zones), imposing charges, or rents, for their use (for example, ocean traffic
and ocean fisheries) and prohibiting their use in ecologically sensitive areas should be instituted. It may even be that the revenue generated from the latter system of international governance is
able to pay for the former system of international governance. Enabling the changes we need will also require collective and sustained action to transform
the systems that underpin our engagements with Nature, above all our financial and education
systems. Our global financial system is critical to supporting a more sustainable engagement with Nature. Financial flows devoted to enhancing our natural assets are small and are dwarfed
by subsidies and other financial flows that harm these assets. We need a financial system that
channels financial investments – public and private – towards economic activities that enhance
our stock of natural assets and encourage sustainable consumption and production activities. Governments, central banks, international financial institutions and private financial institutions
all have a role to play. Financial actors can also help us manage and mitigate the risks and uncertainty that result
from our unsustainable engagement with Nature. Businesses and financial institutions can do
this by accounting for dependencies and impacts on Nature in their activities; and through
the measurement and disclosure, not only of climate-related financial risks but Naturerelated financial risks too.