Collectively, however, we have failed to manage our global portfolio of assets sustainably. Estimates show that between 1992 and 2014, produced capital per person doubled, and
human capital per person increased by about 13% globally; but the stock of natural capital per
person declined by nearly 40%. Accumulating produced and human capital at the expense of
natural capital is what economic growth and development has come to mean for many people. In other words, while humanity has prospered immensely in recent decades, the ways in which
we have achieved such prosperity means that it has come at a devastating cost to Nature. Estimates of our total impact on Nature suggest that we would require 1.6 Earths to maintain
the world’s current living standards. The Review calls the imbalance between our demands and Nature’s supply the ‘Impact
Inequality’. Those demands are affected by the size and composition of our individual demands,
the size of the human population, and the efficiency with which we both convert Nature’s
services to meet our demands and return our waste back into Nature. Nature’s supply is affected
by the ‘stock’ of natural assets and its ability to regenerate. Our unsustainable engagement with Nature is endangering the
prosperity of current and future generations. Biodiversity is declining faster than at any time in human history. Current extinction rates, for
example, are around 100 to 1,000 times higher than the baseline rate, and they are increasing. Such declines are undermining Nature’s productivity, resilience and adaptability, and are in turn
fuelling extreme risk and uncertainty for our economies and well-being. The devastating impacts
of COVID-19 and other emerging infectious diseases – of which land-use change and species
exploitation are major drivers – could prove to be just the tip of the iceberg if we continue on
our current path. Many ecosystems, from tropical forests to coral reefs, have already been degraded beyond
repair, or are at imminent risk of ‘tipping points’. These tipping points could have catastrophic consequences for our economies and well-being; and it is costly and difficult, if not impossible,
to coax an ecosystem back to health once it has tipped into a new state. Low income countries,
whose economies are more reliant than high income countries on Nature’s goods and services
from within their own borders, stand to lose the most. Reversing these trends requires action now. To do so would be significantly less costly than delay,
and would help us to achieve wider societal goals, including addressing climate change (itself a
major driver of biodiversity loss) and alleviating poverty. At the heart of the problem lies deep-rooted, widespread
institutional failure. Nature’s worth to society – the true value of the various goods and services it provides – is not
reflected in market prices because much of it is open to all at no monetary charge. These pricing
distortions have led us to invest relatively more in other assets, such as produced capital, and
underinvest in our natural assets. Moreover, aspects of Nature are mobile; some are invisible, such as in the soils; and many
are silent. These features mean that the effects of many of our actions on ourselves and
others – including our descendants – are hard to trace and go unaccounted for, giving rise to
widespread ‘externalities’ and making it hard for markets to function well. But this is not simply a market failure: it is a broader institutional failure too. Many of our
institutions have proved unfit to manage the externalities. Governments almost everywhere
exacerbate the problem by paying people more to exploit Nature than to protect it, and to
prioritise unsustainable economic activities. A conservative estimate of the total cost globally
of subsidies that damage Nature is around US$4 to 6 trillion per year. And we lack the
institutional arrangements needed to protect global public goods, such as the ocean or the
world’s rainforests. The 15th Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity (COP15) and the 26th
Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP26) provide
important opportunities to set a new, ambitious direction for the coming decade, and establish
the right environment to deliver on commitments made and the institutional arrangements
needed to ensure those commitments are met. The solution starts with understanding and accepting a simple
truth: our economies are embedded within Nature, not external
to it. While most models of economic growth and development recognise that Nature is capable only
of producing a finite flow of goods and services, the focus has been to show that technological
progress can, in principle, overcome that exhaustibility. This is to imagine that, ultimately,
humanity is ‘external’ to Nature. The Review develops the economics of biodiversity on the understanding that we – and our
economies – are ‘embedded’ within Nature, not external to it. The Review’s approach is based
firmly in what we know from ecology about how ecosystems function, and how they are
affected by economic activity, including the extraction of natural resources for our production
and consumption, and the waste we produce through these activities, which ultimately damages
ecosystems and undermines their ability to provide the services on which we rely. This approach
helps us to understand that the human economy is bounded and reshapes our understanding
of what constitutes truly sustainable economic growth and development: accounting fully for
the impact of our interactions with Nature and rebalancing our demand with Nature’s capacity
to supply. We need to change how we think, act and measure success. Humanity faces an urgent choice.