On the Hebridean island where I live, off the western coast of Scotland, windy days are smelly ones because large amounts of seaweed wash ashore, accumulating on the northern ends of beaches. For some, this might be an unremarkable occurrence, but here, on our small island, we see seaweed as a gift.
There are around 1,000 of us – crofters and office workers, incomers like me, and those who have stayed forever. Daily travel is dependent on the tides, the swells, and the weather at the ports that host the ferries. Limitations like these keep Earth’s cycles in continual focus. I like it this way. I lock my windows when a storm is coming, and I watch the waves. Afterward, I go and look for seaweed. In the winter, when storms are stronger, a man from the village next to mine drives his tractor down to the beach and drags the seaweed up to a higher spot. He creates a towering pile that smells like faeces. It feeds the island.
Here, we use seaweed as a fertiliser, because it is rich in elements that humans and plants both need for living, such as nitrogen and potassium. It also contains one particular substance that I have spent much of my life thinking about: phosphorus.
Stored in rock and organic material, phosphorus cycles slowly around Earth, through magma and mountains, down rivers, through waste and into oceans. Without it, there’d be no life – every living being needs it to grow. Unlike other mined materials, we all eat it. In the human body, it gives our cells energy, structure and identity, and it is particularly concentrated in our bones.
Rare enough to be notable, common enough to be necessary, phosphorus tracks the development of our planet. Over billions of years, as life and Earth evolved, phosphorus held the two together. Two hundred million years ago, when Pangaea broke apart, all those newly exposed continental edges leaked phosphorus into the oceans, leading to a biological boom. Something similar, though smaller, is happening today due to the rapid growth and uplift – and exposure – of the Himalayas. Trace amounts of phosphorus in mountains are enough to raise the biological productivity of the world.
Phosphorus fascinates me because it is a tangible expression of big ideas – a literal crystallisation of life on our planet. I am not the first observer to see worlds within this element. Phosphorus over the years has inspired bouts of marvelling and poetry, of reflection on our place within the world. In the 19th century, the theologian and geologist William Buckland found in phosphate ‘records of warfare, waged by successive generations of inhabitants of our planet on one another’. The naturalist Leonard Jenyns, some years later, saw in phosphate rock ‘the tracings of the fingers of God’.
This is a life-giving material that runs throughout Earth, a vibrant substance that is accessible to everyone. (Chemically isolated, it literally glows.) And yet humanity, on the whole, has turned it into a pollutant, creating life – and death – in the wrong places. In excess, it causes eutrophication, leading to algal blooms or sargassum outbreaks that suffocate other aquatic life. Our species’ relationship with this essential element has mirrored our own trajectory from living within nature’s cycles to imposing linear, extractive systems on the planet. By mining million-year-old phosphate and releasing it into the world’s waters, we are changing the biological composition, and even the geological structure, of the world. Understanding the phosphorus cycle means reckoning with our influence on Earth.
Across aeons, phosphorus limits life: it is the single element, on a global level, that determines the quantity of biomass in existence. That is because it is the rarest of those most necessary. Life may be constrained, in different places, by other elements or other circumstances, but within the context of the most extensive planetary measures, it is phosphorus that has been the great determinant.
The phosphorus cycle works like this: molecules, present in crust, make up trace amounts of all the rocks around us. They erode into rivers and feed life along the banks. Bits of rocks and sand in soils also contain phosphate crystals, which microscopic organisms break down. Much of the phosphorus that enters the biological world remains there. Beings die, they decompose, and then they are consumed again. But eventually, phosphorus returns to the ground, as organisms decay, lithify, and fossilise. Occasionally, across deep time, when phosphorus was locked away in rocks, there were moments when the world contained less life. But when continental edges were exposed to erosion, when mountain ranges rose up and weathered away, more phosphorus ran into the oceans, and productivity increased.
Just as phosphorus limits life, it also enables us to grow. It makes up cell membranes (phospholipids), enables energy storage (adenosine triphosphate), and gives structure to DNA (the sugar-phosphate backbone). It cannot be replaced and is, therefore, a required component of every new cell that is created.
As a result, phosphorus has been a silent architect of human history. Early farmers relied on the phosphorus cycle. Civilisations were built where the soil was rich: along riverbeds that flooded, carrying phosphorus; in places where upwelling ocean waters produced phosphorus for the land nearby; on islands and near deltas where phosphorus collected. The Inca built their empire along coastline that matched the habitats of seabirds, which produced nutrient-dense guano. Ancient Egyptians developed intricate systems that trapped the phosphorus that rushed down the Nile; it had originated in the basalts of the Ethiopian Plateau.


