Dr. Sinervo would sometimes observe a blue male die defending an ally in a fight against an orange one. Yellow males were less aggressive still. They didn’t bother to guard any territory at all. Instead, they tried to secretly mate with females guarded by other males. Blue males usually chased the yellow males off their small territories. But orange males, struggling to keep control over many females spread across a wide area, did a worse job of catching intruders. So female lizards guarded by orange males often ended up producing many offspring of the sneaky yellow males. Dr. Sinervo tracked the male lizards over time and discovered that they went through cycles. The orange males had the biggest population for a year or two before giving way to the yellow, which then gave way to the blue, which in turn gave way to the orange again. Back at Indiana University, Dr. Sinervo analyzed the results with his colleague Curtis Lively, an evolutionary biologist. They wondered if they could make sense of the results by thinking of the lizards as playing a game. There’s a long tradition in biology of thinking about life as a game, a competition to leave as many descendants as possible. The players could be animals, plants or microbes. Biologists have borrowed equations from game theory to analyze how some strategies win out over others. One day, as Dr. Sinervo and Dr. Lively drank coffee and puzzled over the data about side-blotched lizards, they realized that the males were playing a game of their own. “I remember him jumping up in the coffee shop and shouting, ‘It’s rock-paper-scissors!’” Dr. Lively said of Dr. Sinervo in an interview. In 1996, Dr. Sinervo and Dr. Lively published a mathematical model of the lizard version of the game. The way that the orange lizards could consistently beat the blue ones was akin to rock always beating scissors. The blue lizards beat the yellow ones like scissors beats paper. And, just as paper beats rock, the yellow lizards could win out against the orange males. To create their model, the scientists assumed that each color was encoded by a variation in the genes of the lizards. When the males of one color had more success at mating, they passed down more copies of their genes and made the color more common — until the next color took over. Image
Lizards with variously colored throats behave differently, as these cards the researchers created describe (with a little humor mixed in). Credit...Ammon Corl
But Dr. Sinervo and Dr. Lively didn’t actually know how the different colors and behaviors arose in the lizards. In the 1990s, they lacked the tools that would let them answer that question. But in 2012, Ammon Corl, one of Dr. Sinervo’s former students, took on the challenge of discovering the inner workings of the game. It would take him 13 years to get some answers which, in the new study, he and his colleagues have now published. Dr. Lively, who was not involved in the study, said it represented a major advance in understanding evolutionary games — one made possible by the huge advances in DNA sequencing over the last three decades. “It was unimaginable to us in those days that something like this could be done,” Dr. Lively said. Dr. Corl could not study side-blotched lizards in his lab the way researchers study more familiar species like fruit flies and mice. For reasons that scientists don’t yet understand, male side-blotched lizards do not develop colors in captivity. “Controlled genetic experiments really couldn’t be done,” said Dr. Corl, who is now a biologist at the University of California, Berkeley. Instead, he and his colleagues had to catch the lizards in the California hills, note the colors on their throats and take a sample of their blood to analyze back in the lab. But analyzing the lizards’ DNA posed immense challenges as well. The standard way to analyze an animal’s genes started with isolating DNA from cells, and then breaking the molecules into little fragments. Researchers then made many copies of each fragment and read the genetic letters that made up each one. By comparing the fragments to a complete genome sequence, they could figure out where in the genome the fragment came from and could then pinpoint the variation. But no one had ever sequenced a side-blotched lizard genome before, so Dr. Corl and his colleagues had no way to determine where each fragment of the animal’s DNA belonged. As a result, Dr. Corl and his colleagues had to spend years assembling a genome of a side-blotched lizard to serve as a reference for their research. Once they had done so, the researchers could search the DNA of an individual lizard for a genetic variation that might determine its color. Try as they might, they could not find any clear-cut differences. Fortunately, more accurate methods for sequencing DNA became available in recent years, which Dr. Corl and his colleagues used to sequence a second lizard genome. At last, Dr. Corl and his colleagues could see even the tiniest genetic differences between the animals. “The story crystallized, and it all fell into place,” Dr. Corl said. He and his colleagues found that orange and blue males differed at just one spot in their genomes. The genetic variation between them turned out to be remarkably simple. An orange neck, Dr. Corl and his colleagues discovered, is a recessive trait. In other words, lizards need to inherit two copies of the orange variant to develop that color.