Over time, as farming became a more extractive industry, people discovered that some rocks contain particularly high concentrations of phosphate, the mineral that contains phosphorus. It was the beginning of the age of phosphate rock, which coincided with a time of European agricultural struggle. When nutrients were taken from the land, they were not replaced – land was a resource to be exploited, and people were viewed the same. The lands of Europe degraded first. As cities grew, good soil became more valuable. Some farmers took to grinding phosphate pebbles, found in pits or rivers, to supplement their soils, although the phosphate contained within those pebbles remained largely inert and inaccessible. Around 200 years ago, scientists found a way to make that phosphate available to the soil – to break its structure by treating it with acid – and geologists began to search for stores of buried phosphate rock.
That acid-treated phosphate rock was known as superphosphate, and as it rose in prominence so, too, did phosphate mining. From pits in England to islands in the Pacific to the growing industrial mines of the United States, China and Morocco, phosphate rock was excavated around the world. To reach the phosphate layer, the surface would be razed – chopped or burned – and the soil dug out. There were enough mines to make a significant change but few enough to ensure their value – as phosphorus remains rare, on a global scale.
Today, the phosphate industry mines fossil beds: places where life bloomed and was preserved, phosphorus along with it. Life from death, once again, but this time extracted from deep time. Over more than a century, billions of tonnes of phosphate have been lifted from those places – and, by doing so, humans have broken the phosphorus cycle.
Here is what else happened when people started mining phosphate rock: we stopped reusing animal manures and allowed them instead to run off into rivers. We stopped reusing human waste, leaving it in sewage in the sea. We stopped composting food waste. We began contending with the effects of that pollution – eutrophication of waters, the emergence of dead zones, where phosphorus fed algae that supplanted other organisms. We became reliant on bigger farms that needed mined fertilisers to function. We began to think that such a system is the only way to be.
Industrial agriculture relies on phosphate mining, and the mines produce, around the world, a quarter of a billion tonnes of phosphate every year. But this represents just a minuscule fraction of the total amount of phosphorus on Earth. Phosphorus is present everywhere, a circulatory system that runs around the world.
It is present in the structures of Earth; in the rocks that form geologic features; on the seafloor; in the seafloor; in the oceans; in algae and trees and animals and fungi and all the other living beings of this world. After all, living beings first concentrated it, leading to the deposits we mine today. At Earth’s beginning, when the planet was soupy, the elements were mixed together in solution. Phosphorus was, broadly speaking, evenly distributed. Early cells collected phosphate in order to exercise their core functions. As life grew more expansive, it used more phosphate.
Every soil contains some amount of phosphate. Sand, whittled down from larger minerals, contains significant amounts of it. But that phosphorus is accessible only through the work of microorganisms: phosphate, on its own, cannot travel to the roots of plants. Fungi and bacteria break down the minerals in the soil, holding nutrients while living and then, in dying, converting them into an accessible organic form. Fungal networks transfer phosphate to plants. Without a healthy soil, the mineral remains inert.
When humans started mining phosphate rock, we created an agricultural system that devastated soils. Heavy machinery hardened the ground, pesticides killed microorganisms, and those that remained were starved by a lack of organic material (the stalks and leaves and half-digested grasses that make up manures and other natural fertilisers, rich in carbon, had been labelled, by the makers of synthetic fertiliser, inefficiencies). It seemed to work at first, but over time, as the soils deadened, the benefits have become less obvious.
The argument for this new system went like this: natural phosphate fertilisers are watery; they are heavy. Manure is difficult to move around: all that carbon, those stalks and grasses. And the places where animals and plants thrive are often different. (In England, for example, crops tend to grow in the east, animals in the wetter west.) To feed billions of people, you need a lightweight fertiliser applied with scientific precision.
That is the argument. The argument falls to pieces on the ground. A soil is not an easily replicable substance. It is complicated and alive. The crop plants grown through industrialised systems are, disproportionately, not those that provide the world’s nutrition. They are the cornfields grown for use in corn syrup. They are the sugar-cane plantations designed to produce cheap fuel. Phosphate fertilisers, made from mined material, are greasing the gears of the industrial state.
Ibegan thinking about phosphorus when I was small, long before I ever learned about the periodic table or any chart of geological time. In the state of Virginia, where I grew up and where my grandmother lived, two hours away, on the edge of a city near the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay, I used to garden. In the little red toolshed behind her house, my grandmother kept a bag of dried bone powder. She applied it to her soil when she felt it needed phosphorus.
But this was not her only source of nutrients. She kept dried blood, rich in nitrogen; slaughterhouse waste sold as fertiliser. She had potash, containing potassium. She tended compost piles in a quiet corner of her garden, and this was how her plants continued to thrive.

