At the end of August 1939, the German archaeologist Otto Völzing discovered around 200 fragments of carved mammoth ivory at the back of a cave in southern Germany. With war just a week away, Völzing’s find was hurriedly collected in a box, where it lay unnoticed in a museum archive for decades. It wasn’t until the 1960s, when the shards were inventoried, that something astonishing emerged out of the heap of broken pieces. They formed an incomplete figurine, with a chimeric mix of features: the body of person, and the head and forearms of a cave lion. Subsequent excavations in the 1970s found further pieces of what has come to be called the Lion-Man of Hohlenstein-Stadel. Carved from a mammoth tusk around 40,000 years ago, it is one of the earliest examples of the human capacity to imagine forms that don’t exist in nature.
Every age of human history since the Lion-Man has tried to think beyond nature. In Hesiod’s Theogony, composed around 700 BCE, the chimera was a compound being with the head of a lion, the body of a dragon, and a snake’s-head tail (and an extra goat’s head protruding from its back for good measure). In W B Yeats’s poem ‘The Second Coming’ (1920), a similar ‘rough beast’ is a harbinger of ruin.
In our own time, the chimeras are something different. Living things in every part of the biosphere have been forced by climate change, pollution and the spread of non-native species to adapt their bodies and behaviours to a human planet. They may not have visibly merged forms like the Lion-Man, but they do bear the impression of another species: us.
It wasn’t our intention that humanity would become the planet’s greatest evolutionary force; yet the fact that we are confronts us with an urgent and difficult question. Some animals, plants and insects can adapt but, for many, the pace of change is too great. Should we try to save them by deliberately intervening in their evolution?
The emergence of precision gene-editing technology like CRISPR-Cas9, which acts like a molecular scalpel so fine it can swap even single letters of DNA, has made a world of chimeric species possible. For some, splicing the DNA of extinct megafauna like dire wolves and mammoth into grey wolves or Asian elephants is an opportunity to resurrect a long-vanished world. But with synthetic biology we could potentially save the world of the present, intervening in the evolution of vulnerable species so they can survive changing climates and collapsing ecosystems. Plants could be edited to cope with drought, or to improve photosynthesis in crops. Microbes could be programmed to sense pollution and consume toxins, even the marine plastic that gluts the digestive tracts of seabirds. With assisted evolution, we might spare coral reef systems from collapse.
The technical challenges of transgenic rescue are formidable. Every living creature’s traits are a combination of its genes and its environment. But it’s difficult to know precisely which combination of genes produces a particular set of traits; simply editing the genome also doesn’t change the fact that the complex ecological relationships that are crucial to shaping them may also be in flux. The ethical questions are perhaps greater still. Directing the evolution of other species looks a lot like playing God. In an age when international corporations have a stronger claim to legal personhood than living systems, and the genomes of commodified species like the broiler chicken have already been patented, the question of who decides which animals to alter and how can’t be ignored. For some, the best we can do for nature is to leave it alone.
But it’s an illusion to suppose that, at this point, our species can simply step back. The notion that ‘nature’ exists in a pure state is itself dubious, but if it were ever so, that time has long passed. ‘We’ are present in every molecule of anthropogenic carbon added to the atmosphere or the oceans, which will continue to shape the biosphere even if we were to immediately stop burning fossil fuels. Close to 50,000 species are at risk of extinction, according to the IUCN Red List. Not intervening may mean accepting loss on a frankly intolerable scale.
Four billion years of evolution prove that transformation is nature’s genius. But the scale and speed of humanity’s impacts suggest that even genius might need some assistance. If so, then we shouldn’t approach this simply as a change in technology, but as an opportunity for a change of mind. For millennia we have exported much of our evolutionary development to our cultures and technology as secondary inheritance systems, transmitting information and skills across time through social learning as well as our genes. Every new tool, from the stone knife to the internet, has altered the hand that wielded it. The question is, then, if we are to edit other species, can we do it ethically and wisely? And how should it also change us?
Corals are perhaps the best example of natural chimera. In appearance, they seem to straddle the boundary between plant and mineral; biologically, they are an ancient alliance between animal and microbe. Polyps, tiny soft-bodied creatures whose calcium carbonate secretions build vast reef conurbations, rely on microscopic zooxanthellae to provide nutrients and energy, as well as the photosynthetic pigments that paint reefs the colour of an acid dream.
Corals show that an animal is more than its DNA; any living thing is a matrix of connections with other species (a point that critics of de-extinction often make: shorn of the web of living relations that sustained it, is a resurrected mammoth really a mammoth?) If ecology teaches us anything, it’s that being is a collaboration. But relationships can be fragile.  
