Practical and straightforward, Van Oppen explained her motivation to me when I was researching and writing my book Nature’s Genius (2025). ‘I don’t want to control nature,’ she said, her Dutch accent barely inflected by years of living and working in Australia. ‘I just want to help it get over that hurdle.’
It may be that total control isn’t possible even if we wished it to be. Assisting coral evolution is not yet an exact science. The precise genetic recipe for heat-resistance hasn’t been mapped, and we don’t know which edits might entail unhappy trade-offs (heat-resistant coral may be less able to process nutrients, for instance). The risk of unintended consequences ought to be reason for caution. That said, most current efforts to assist evolution look a lot like a much older, more conservative form of assisted evolution: domestication. Just as early farmers cultivated crops and animals by selecting individuals with the most desirable characteristics to breed, most assisted evolution involves promoting conditions for coral themselves to share the genetic resources that might help the reef survive.
Some of the most promising projects involve collaborations with people who have lived alongside these ecosystems for millennia. The Yirrganydji have occupied Dawul Wuru – around 500 square kilometres of coastline in northern Queensland – for thousands of years. Kul-Bul, or Sea Country, stretches tens of kilometres from the coastline out to sea, including some of the worst heat-affected reef. In 2022, the Yirrganydji Land and Sea Rangers managed the transfer of heat-tolerant coral larva from neighbouring Gunggandji Sea Country to Dawul Wuru, combining traditional understanding of the use of marine resources with Van Oppen’s principles of assisted evolution. They are one of many such traditional owner groups working with coral scientists in coalitions of Western science and traditional ecological knowledge to help vulnerable coral clear the hurdle of rising temperatures.
Country is the foundation of Yirrganydji culture. It is the source of Dreaming, the living fund of story and landscape that sustains Indigenous cultures in Australia: like the coral dinoflagellates that feed the polyps, Dreaming nourishes connection. For the Yirrganydji Land and Sea Rangers, intervening in evolution means acting as partners with other species. Assisting evolution is, in the end, about forming alliances – with other species, and with different ways of knowing the living world.
Assisted evolution depends on the collaboration between reef scientists and traditional owners. But what if there was a truly empyrean technology – one that, effectively, could remake entire ecosystems with a single gesture?
Kevin Esvelt is a biologist who has shown this is possible – if we so choose. One day in 2013, Esvelt realised that he could solve endemic ecological problems by creating CRISPR edits that would pass from one generation to the next. Gene drives are elements in a genome whose heritable potential is enhanced. By exploiting this strain of bias in the system, Esvelt realised he could build a synthetic gene drive: a DNA-editing machine that, once added to the genome, would recur in each succeeding generation.
The power of a synthetic gene drive is difficult to overstate. Used for good, it could spread heat resistance through coral populations or immunity to anthropogenic diseases, or eradicate introduced predators; used for ill, it could become a terrifying biological weapon. A gene drive could be an extinction engine, giving the power of life or death over entire species to whoever wields it.
Esvelt couldn’t ignore the potential in gene drives, but nor could he ignore the risks. ‘The next day, I woke up in a cold sweat,’ he told me. He devised a series of safety measures that would limit the gene drive’s spread by scattering parts of its architecture across the genome, reducing the likelihood of a functioning gene drive appearing with each new generation. But a technical fix alone wouldn’t ensure that the fearsome technology would be used responsibly.
In 2014, Esvelt co-authored a paper that suggested gene drive could control invasive species in Aotearoa/New Zealand. For 85 million years, the frogs, bats, birds and lizards there lived in biological isolation. European settlers brought this to a brutal end as, first, rats, then, weasels and ferrets feasted on the defenceless local fauna. The country now has one of the worst extinction records on Earth, much of it due to the impact of introduced species. A targeted gene drive called ‘last litter’, where males are edited so that they cannot produce fertile daughters, could suppress the mustelid population in a matter of generations.
However, as he later acknowledged in a post on the MIT Media Lab website, Esvelt had not consulted Māori before he’d made this suggestion. The Māori conservationist Melanie Mark-Shadbolt’s observation that he had been ‘naive’ about the need for Māori co-governance on the matter of gene drives was, Esvelt conceded, ‘searingly true’. ‘I know as little of the local ecosystem as I do of the local politics,’ he said. ‘I cannot possibly evaluate the likely consequences.’ The decision whether to use a gene drive, he concluded, should include the community who would be most affected by it, informed by the principles that had governed their relationship with the land for generations. Esvelt learned from his mistake and invested time in consulting with different iwis, or tribes, to hear their views on gene drives. After speaking with Māori conservationists myself, I gained a clearer view of why this matters so much – and what the rest of the world might learn from the approach when weighing up interventions in nature.
Māori worldview rests on mātauranga, an intricate system of knowledge and values contoured to the ecosystem of Aotearoa/New Zealand. 

