The study adds to an expansive repertoire of research over the past decade that has uncovered robust similarities between ape and human behaviours, upending long-held beliefs about how we distinguish ourselves from our closest kin. “It seems to be a recurring thing in our field where people come up with reasons why humans are special and unique, and then scientists like me test it out, and we find that, actually, maybe we’re not that special after all,” says the study’s lead author, Amalia Bastos, a comparative psychologist at the University of St Andrews in Scotland. “That animals, too, are capable of secondary representations or imagination.”

Kanzi, who died last year, participated in several experiments with Bastos and her colleagues to test his ability to make believe. “We start all of these trials by saying, ‘Kanzi, let’s play a game. Let’s find the juice.’ That way we can at least verbally scaffold as much as possible,” Bastos says. In one scenario, two cups were “filled” with juice, and then one was “emptied” into the jug. Kanzi was then asked to indicate which cup contained juice. He chose correctly in 34 out of 50 trials, suggesting he could grasp the concept of a pretend beverage. In another test, he was asked to choose between real orange juice and pretend juice. In 14 out of the 18 trials, he chose the cup containing real juice. Kanzi’s ability to pretend – to envision a reality beyond the one in front of him – would have been unthinkable just a few decades ago. In the 1990s, scientists acknowledged that apes were intelligent, that they could solve puzzles and use tools, that they built strong social relationships and could learn symbols and sign language, and that they could pass the mirror test, recognising their reflections to suggest some level of self-awareness. But primatologists and cognitive researchers were only just beginning to think about some of the more abstract and complex questions of culture, representation and theory of mind in great apes. In recent years, scientists have unearthed dozens of stunning findings about great apes’ mental capabilities. Chimpanzees and bonobos can remember past groupmates for decades. When presented with stronger evidence, chimpanzees rationally revise their previously held beliefs. Western lowland gorillas engage in kissing behaviours. Orangutans, bonobos, chimpanzees and gorillas playfully tease one another. Bonobos will cooperate across social borders with outsiders. And chimpanzees have a quirky and obsessive fascination with crystals, like human “New Age” folk. In particular, scientists have made significant strides in understanding apes’ theory of mind. Once believed to be a distinctly human trait, theory of mind is the ability to understand that other individuals have their own thoughts, beliefs, desires, intentions and knowledge that may differ from our own. “In the last several decades, we’ve seen transformative insights coming from a number of different research groups that all point to the idea that chimpanzees and other apes are extremely sensitive to their social partners,” says Christopher Krupenye, a cognitive scientist at Johns Hopkins University in Maryland, US. “This is a case where 30 years ago the dominant view was there is no evidence whatsoever. And, today, the consensus is that there is an exciting capacity here.” Scientists are still endeavouring to truly understand the cognitive potential of our fellow primates. Humans and apes diverged from a common ancestry between 6m and 9m years ago. But unlike Homo sapiens, which has surged to a population of 8 billion, the other seven great ape species are struggling to survive. The Bornean orangutan, Sumatran orangutan, Tapanuli orangutan, eastern gorilla, western gorilla, chimpanzee and bonobo are all listed as endangered or critically endangered. Time may be running out to fully understand their inner worlds. “Part of the reason to study great apes is that they are our closest relatives, so we’re learning something about ourselves,” says Krupenye. “But we’re working with these remarkable creatures with rich mental lives that have so much more going on under the surface than people give them credit for.” The rational mind
The Greek philosopher Aristotle once defined humans as “the rational animal”. People, he asserted, possessed a unique capacity for reason and deliberation that set them apart. “But what does it actually mean to be rational?” asks Hanna Schleihauf, a comparative psychologist at Utrecht University in the Netherlands. One of the most significant advances in recent years is the finding that chimpanzees revise their beliefs as the strength of evidence changes. In a 2025 study of semi-captive chimpanzees at Ngamba Island chimpanzee sanctuary in Uganda, Schleihauf and her colleagues presented a group of chimpanzees with evolving evidence about the location of a food reward. “If you hold a certain belief for a certain reason, and then you learn that your reason is wrong, you should actually drop your belief that you had,” Schleihauf says. “And this is what we tried to do with the chimps.” In a series of trials, researchers presented the chimpanzees with two boxes facing away from the subject. They rattled one box, indicating food might be inside. At this point, the chimp chose which box it wanted. Then, the researchers turned the second box around so that the chimp could see something inside that resembled an apple. The chimp then had the opportunity to choose again, based on this stronger evidence. In this case, if a chimp was being rational, it would change its mind “because the first choice was based on weak evidence, and then you learn there is actually strong evidence on the other side,” says Schleihauf.