These double standards are part of a scientific bias against alien species that some researchers and philosophers have taken to calling ‘ecological nativism’: a dogmatic presumption that native species should be favoured over alien species. Ihad a striking encounter with ecological nativism a few years ago when I was part of a group working to restore a riverside landscape in Utah. During a planning meeting, the team descended into an unexpectedly heated debate about shrubbery. At issue was which species we should plant to filter pollutants. To many of us, the obvious answer would emerge from experimentation: test different groupings of plant species, take measurements, and see which worked best. But the conservation biologist on our team was certain that all this was unnecessary because the right answer was obvious: if we planted native plant species everything would work out. This is textbook ecological nativism – the idea that a species’ geographic origin tells us pretty much everything we need to know. It’s a view that is now ubiquitous. In a systematic review of the scientific literature, the biologist Patricio Pereyra and colleagues found that 66 per cent of scientific articles frame alien species negatively, 33 per cent neutrally, and only 1 per cent positively. That’s not necessarily problematic, since it is possible that those alien species may have deserved the negative framing if they really were harmful. But Pereyra and co found that how a species is framed in the scientific literature is independent of evidence of harm. An alien species we know little about is just as likely to be framed negatively as one that has been implicated in driving extinction. Species on the World’s Worst Invasive Alien Species list, which the International Union for Conservation of Nature compiles based on evidence of harm, have the same probability of being negatively, neutrally or positively framed as species that are not remotely contenders for such a blacklist. In other words, even in the peer-reviewed scientific literature, the presentation of alien species as dangerous is a function of a widespread nativist bias, not data-driven analysis. If we revisited the scientific data without the bias of nativism, we’d probably end up with a very different account of the harms of alien species: no thousands of invasive species, no hundreds of billions of dollars in damages each year, no ‘top driver of biodiversity loss’ status. That’s not to say that there aren’t plenty of cases of problematic invasive species, just that the overall scientific picture that’s informing policy is heavily skewed by nativist dogma. A handful of scientists and philosophers have been raising concerns about this dogma for years. In a 2011 letter to Nature, for instance, a group of ecologists led by Mark Davis asked that we ‘don’t judge species on their origins.’ Similarly, the philosopher of economics Mark Sagoff argued that the scope of the damages caused by alien species is wildly overstated, which is why ecological nativists tend to justify their claims by appealing to consensus among themselves rather than to empirical evidence. That gets to the heart of the issue. Is nativist suspicion of alien species driven by prejudice or supported by the data? It would take a monumental effort to revisit all the research, but when we’ve examined studies about particular cases, the results are revisionary. For instance, the majority of Australia’s modern mammal extinctions are usually blamed on invasive cats and foxes. The biologists Arian Wallach and Erick Lundgren recently went looking for the data that supports this view, and found that, for 70 to 80 per cent of purported cases, no such data exists. Worse, once we look at the available data, it seems that most threatened or extinct mammal species have been attributed to cats or foxes without evidence. It’s unlikely, or even impossible, that these alien predators are the real drivers of extinction. If expert opinion isn’t accountable to basic reality checks, it’s probably driven by nativist bias, not scientific evidence. It can be risky to question ecological nativism. When Wallach and Lundgren presented some of their data at an international meeting of conservation biologists in the summer of 2025, they were labelled ‘invasive species denialists,’ and accused of being ideologically motivated. Those of us who question ecological nativism are used to this sort of response. It’s how we’re dismissed in the scientific literature. Ironically, however, it’s those of us accused of scientific denial who are asking for better science. Accusations of ecological danger need to be based on empirical evidence rather than just expert opinion. This isn’t to deny that some alien species can be harmful and need to be managed. It just means requesting a fair trial for an organism before the eradication programmes begin. At present, invasive species are not assessed in the same way as native ones. Placed side by side, these treatments reveal a set of double standards. First, native species are presumed innocent, while alien species are presumed dangerous. Second, we are told to learn to live with the former, while eradication is treated as the default response to the latter. But these assumptions don’t seem to be grounded in data. They function instead as prior judgments that shape how evidence is gathered, interpreted and presented. In this sense, ecological nativism is not a scientific discovery, it’s a rigged result we arrive at because we look only for data that will confirm our prejudices. Ahealthy ecosystem is healthy because of the complex web of interactions between its participants.