For Chicaza people, the horse was first called Elk Dog and Wolf Elk. Everywhere, they had similar names. Most think of Indian horses first on the Northern Plains or with the Nez Perce, but they entered our southern lands in the mid-1500s. We bred short Spanish Barbs long before horses reached those other regions of the country. Our own beloved breed became a major part of our trade system. It is said that their necks were not long and that sometimes they bent a leg to graze the rich grasses. Fast runners, muscular workers, some are believed to have remained from De Soto’s stay with the Chicaza in 1551 near the once-wide Tombigbee River where we lived when they arrived, dressed in armor, probably overheated, hungry, and with a history of horrific violence we knew because news traveled quickly from nation to nation. There were no secrets.
Unknown to most Indian horse people, horses of the Southeast were once just called “Chickasaws,” as I was told by Elder Tom Phillips in one of our long conversations. I find no other documentation of this, but I do find it certain that they would have been in great demand, and these horses were soon moved across land, then up and down the Mississippi River on flatboats. We had extensive trade networks with other nations far away. We all lived by such trade and friendships, not by war, as is often said by historians.
One of these Spanish Barb horses came to me in a roundabout way through an accident I had with another horse I thought I might buy. Because of numerous injuries, including fractures in the pelvis and a serious brain injury, I woke in a brain and spinal cord hospital. I have no memory of the accident. I was found broken and bleeding on a dirt road near my home. Hospitalized, I spoke words and stories I no longer recall.
Trying to walk again, to learn skills, I watched the site of Colorado Horse Rescue. I’d been on their waiting list for at least two years, ever since purchasing the small cabin with fifteen acres. While still in the hospital, I fell in love with a large black tender-looking horse named Alf without realizing his great size. I sent him cards and sweetgrass. Clearly the barn keeper and workers realized I wasn’t in my right mind when mail arrived from a hospital, and it was from a woman looking at a horse so large a special wagon had to be built to trailer him when he was finally adopted by a family and taken to his new home where he was loved by all.
But I was recovering. Such an interesting word, a body healing being akin to the way certain plants take over the life of broken earth. Still, it was not the condition in which I wanted to find myself after having nearly been killed by a horse. I wanted to heal a brain that now had two gray spots where synapses were broken, where memories once lived, including the memory of the accident, which was gone. Now and then I have a glimpse of the crazy horse racing out of control to the top of a hill and jumping. I can’t know if the saddle slipped. I tried to put together the injuries, the fractures in the pelvis, injuries to the right foot, injured neck, the head that must have hit earth more than once but with the worst injury to the left-brain region, causing the brain to hit the front right of the skull bone, twisting that soft organ in the center and partially dividing two hemispheres. Two brains. Like a dolphin, I thought more than once. Maybe instead of needing the sleep I rarely had, I now had two minds. But the man who later tested me said I would never be able to work at anything again, although I did recover, at least in part.
Returning home, I never remembered I couldn’t walk, and I continued to fall. But healing takes place, even in the hardness of bones. One day, to the horror of my family, I received a phone call from the horse rescue. They thought they had a horse for me. Still far from healed, I nevertheless went right away with my crutches—not the walker—to look at the horses. I still wanted to fulfill my dream and find a horse. By then it must have been spring. Wildflowers grew near my home, but out east at the horse rescue, everything was dry with wind occasionally blowing up dust devils. Still, I heard a meadowlark. Looking around were many other people looking at the rescued horses, which were in various kinds of shape: hungry, injured, elderly.
The barn manager wore a dirty Carhartt jumpsuit and was herself dirty with a thin, tanned face. She was outside, dusty, and leaning against the entrance, smoking a cigarette as she sized up my inexperience and the shape I was in. I felt childlike and ignorant in comparison. I was now a person with poor memory and crutches, but there I was, looking at horses. Her eyes spoke her thoughts about my stupidity, as if we were two different species.
An expansive, cheerful volunteer walked me about, but stopped more than once at a round pen containing a dark-faced pitiful horse. Finally, she mentioned how the horse looked at me more than once and seemed to be claiming me as hers. I think she knew I’d believe her, or perhaps this was the horse they planned for me all along, the safest, the hungry and overly thin, hooves filled with blood, body scarred and branded. I went back and looked again. Nearby someone patted a horse and dust flew out of the fur. Little did I know that dust was a word that later defined much of my life.

