The depth of a bison’s gaze reflecting the landscape that surrounds them has become a marker for how I wish to see and be seen by my own loves and losses. Bison deepen my heart. I bow to bison whenever I am in their presence. It is my private embrace throughout the seasons: in the bucolic spring their sweet red babies are living proof of love; in summer, they roam and tarry in green mansions; in autumn, they snort and shine; they are boulders immovable in the blizzards of the Northern Rockies, breaking trail through the snow when the clouds clear.
The bodies of bison are a landscape unto themselves. This is what they gave to me, my own body becoming animal in relationship to other animal bodies. My erotic education began as a girl who wanted to be a bison. I stood at the edge of large herds of what we then called buffalo in Wyoming. These massive brown-on-black bodies with steam rising from the heat of their own hearts, beating in the chill of October mornings among the dew-drenched grasses, thrilled me. We were witnesses to their pleasure while they wallowed in the mud on their backs with their legs flailing before the sky. Upright, the curve of their shining horns on their massive heads created a crown of nobility, followed by the iconic hump on their shoulders, so thick with soft, curly hair, I wished to sink my fingers into their coats even as a child. My brother Steve and I settled for the found pieces of bison hair snatched by the fingers of sage.
The bison’s muscularity is sculpted and accentuated by the narrowing of their hips down to their haunches. It is a shining topography against the monotony of the prairie. The swishing of tails and the sound of wind weaving grasses into a tapestry can hardly be differentiated.
In rutting season, the snorting among them quickened as they sparred and fought for their territories with blood-red eyes. A single bull circling a group of females mounted each of them within view. This is how I learned about sex. Their arousal became my own.
This is not bestiality, but a pansexual bonding of earthly bodies in an awakened state.
With age, my passion only intensified. My uncle gave me a buffalo hide from one he shot in Utah’s Henry Mountains not far from where we live. I spent most of my adolescence wrapped in this buffalo robe holding my fantasies close, both human and wild. Informed by the pleasure of my own body, I saw myself lying next to a bison, any one of them, wet and ready. If we are gender-fluid, can we not be species-fluid, as well?
If our human connectedness to all beings and our evolving capacity to love who we wish and how we wish to be loved—beyond gender, race, and religion—why can’t we extend our love and compassion forward in the name of an interspecies connectivity and telepathy toward all the many beings with whom we share this planet?
Our human exceptionalism has destroyed countless populations of species and peoples on this free-floating planet. We continue to pursue this relentless path of destruction in the places we know by name in our forever wars, abroad and at home. With our aggressive arrogance and ignorance, we place ourselves first, draped in greed and entitlement, as the world burns and floods within an ever-worsening climate. And at the same time, we are also trying to find some semblance of reconstruction, restoration, and adaptation to change by imagining a different way of being.
Honoring interspecies connectedness, the steady stillness of bison, the agility of flight among phalaropes and grebes who understand the necessity of return, allows us to acknowledge and celebrate our innate feelings of a cellular, cosmic love that pulses and throbs and awakens intimacy for all life. Our shared affection given freely and received openly from all the beings we live among is a deep, evolutionary genealogy that branches out in all directions.
Bison are formidable beings, it is best to keep one’s distance, but I continue to witness and dream of them in rapturous moments of mutual recognition.
Both the lake and the bison herd are survivors within an ongoing narrative of change, what has disappeared in the past and what could disappear in our future by our repeated seasons of desire for more water, for more land, for more profit, for the taking—of everything. Both the lake and the bison are bodies of imperceptible stillness, except when provoked by storms or helicopters herding the animals into pens for annual health checks, or to be sold or slaughtered.
I remember last year being on the edge of Great Salt Lake on Antelope Island with a group of Harvard Divinity School students sitting in a circle around a fire with one of our local political leaders who’d been put in charge of the fate of this saline lake.
A student asked him about the recent petition sent to the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service to place Wilson’s phalarope on the Endangered Species list as a threatened species due to the decline of water in Great Salt Lake. He said, no species had been saved by this Act and began to pontificate his point of view to the students. Suddenly, a great thundering filled the air and the ground began to shake. We stood up to locate the commotion, when we saw hundreds of bison in a stampede running in our direction.
The bison know. The native grasses they wander through know. The phalaropes and grebes know. The brine shrimp and brine flies know. The Bonneville cutthroat know. And Great Salt Lake is trying to show us, repeatedly, change can move through us.

