Greetings, fellow nature adorer and bird lover. By name I am Henry David Thoreau, a resident of a cabin in Concord, Massachusetts, near a great pond called Walden, where I have endeavored, for a short while, to live simply by my own wits and to depend upon wildness to inform my survival. Recently, I’ve been working toward bettering myself as a naturalist, and I came to learn of your wondrous affinity for the avian kind from a gentleman acquaintance hereabouts who saw your work in his travels to Europe a few years ago. His exhortations touting your artistry certainly whet my appetite. I journal my own observations in nature with what discipline I can muster, as I believe it important to record, within and between the seasons, what the creatures and plants are doing in relation to the environs around them. To whit, sir, I myself came across a volume of your Birds of America and was mightily impressed beyond expectations to see it in person. It seems to me that your subjects might very well up and fly from the page!
I am no artist, rest assured, but it occurs to me that we are both equal admirers of wildness in its many forms, feathered, furred, and otherwise. Whilst you have traveled further into the expansive wild than I—into forests and swamps, and even ventured into the West—I have, for the most part, remained more parochial. My beloved Walden Pond, though encroached upon by the burgeoning civilization of Concord, houses its own birdlife. The phoebe, whose migration you’ve marked for the purpose of determining its fidelity to Philadelphia, is equally at home here. I’ve noted its mossy nest tucked under the eaves of my parents’ home. Your portrait of this bird on a cotton plant reminds me that you have spent quite a bit of time in the South, whereas I have not. It is the same bird, I know, but you know it differently still.
And so I applaud you, Mr. Audubon, on the scientific achievement of your folio. It will expand our knowledge of natural history and ornithology immensely. As a fellow bird-watcher and naturalist, I’m grateful for your efforts.
But this, sir, is where I must depart in the strongest manner from you. The vociferous phoebe pair perched on those cotton bolls inspires me to write you on a subject close to the cotton you portrayed. Recently, I became aware of your companion notes and discovered “The Runaway,” the story of your encounter in the dismal bayou swamps of Louisiana with an escaped, enslaved black man and his family, whom he had regathered after they were sold off and separated from him. In this harrowing tale, you speak of how you met him, a beleaguered black man who had found his rightful freedom (rightful in that it should be afforded to every human being). At first, you are frightened by him, but then, after he treats you with the utmost respect and even shares his supper of wild game with you, you decide to repatriate him to the cruelty of slavery’s shackles—the whip, forced labor, and perhaps separation from his family again. This has firmly set me against you, Mr. Audubon. What sort of man can love the black crow—“mistreated,” you claim in your notes, “unduly prosecuted”—whose intelligence and resourcefulness in the face of such injustice merits your admiration, but then let his heart grow cold toward a fellow human being—also mistreated, like the crow—whose skin happens to be a darker hue? Sir, could you not have listened sympathetically to this liberty-seeking fellow and helped him secure it by assisting his effort, or at least left him to his own design, to be as free as your wild birds? What of his wife and children? Did you not see in his familial affections a reflection of your own? And then you call the man “happy” to be a slave again. How could that be, Mr. Audubon? How could any being with feathers or skin find joy in being trapped and imprisoned without choice or free will to come and go?
I must say, Mr. Audubon, I left my respect for you on that page and can no longer look at the birds you painted with such skill and, dare I say, love without thinking of your hate for human beings who do not share your whiteness. I know my fellow abolitionists have railed against you too. I will share that I would have done the opposite of the sin you committed in that swamp. I would gladly assist northward those following the “drinking gourd” toward freedom, beyond the hypocrites who would allow free men to be returned to cruel “masters,” as you did. This nation will reckon with this sin and heavily so. Though I am not a violent man, I fear striking blows may be the only way to stamp out this sinful contrivance.
I will continue to love birds, as I am sure you will. That passion we share, but none else. I pray that some force, Mr. Audubon—God, nature, or the next runaway you might meet who refuses, with a determined steely resolve, to be imprisoned by your obliviousness—changes your heart, toward this life or the hereafter. Had I been that man, I would not have gone lightly. And you, sir, I beseech you to look more circumspectly at this world, and not just at birds. I cannot sign respectfully, but only in truth.

