We participate in this encompassing awareness with the whole of our body, as other animals participate in it with theirs, the snow leopard with its tensed muscles and the hawk with its splayed wing feathers. Every creature here inhabits and moves through the same field of mountains and melting ice, imbibing the same air, the same boulder-strewn awareness. Yet each animal filters this awareness with its particular senses, its access to the whole limited by the arrangement of its limbs and the specific style of its pleasures, by the way it obtains nourishment and the way it avoids becoming food for others. Each creature—two-leggeds included—has only a restricted access to the mystery of the real. As a human J may have compiled a great mass of data about the ways of the world, yet in a practical, visceral sense (carnal knowledge being the primary form of intelligence), an earthworm knows far more about the life of the soil than I do, as a swallow knows more about the wind. To be human is to have a very limited access to what is. Science has tried to push past the carnal constraints on our knowledge by joining deductive reason to the judicious application of experiment. Traditional, tribal magicians or medicine persons take a different approach. They seek to augment the limitations of their specifically human senses by binding their attention to the ways of another animal. Steadily training his focus upon the patterned behavior of another creature—observing it closely in its own terrain, following and interpreting its tracks, becoming familiar with its calls and its styles of stalking or foraging—the medicine person renders himself vulnerable to another, non-human form of experience. The more studiously an apprentice magician watches the other creature from a stance of humility, learning to mimic its cries and to dance its various movements, the more thoroughly his nervous system is joined to another set of senses—thereby gaining a kind of stereoscopic access to the world, a keener perception of the biosphere’s manifold depth and dimensionality. Like anything focused upon so intently, the animal ally will begin visiting the novice shaman’s dreams, imparting understandings wholly inaccessible to her waking mind. She may spend a whole night journeying as that other animal, stalking her prey and sometimes killing and devouring it, before awakening in this twolegged form. Most importantly, because the young shaman is now informed by two very different sets of senses, her allegiance to her own single species begins to loosen; she begins to catch glimpses of a shimmering, ever-shifting lattice of affiliations and interdependencies—the filamental web that binds all beings. Now and then she may catch herself pondering matters less from a human angle than from the perspective of the forest or the river valley as a whole... & In the course of these first months in the Himalayas I came into contact with several jhankris of very diverse skills, and I lived for several weeks with two of them, a husband and wife who were both highly regarded as healers. The woman was suspicious of me at first, since rumors of my own craft had preceded me up their valley. I’d made the mistake of doing some sleight-of-hand for a ragamuffin band of children in a small village, changing stones into Nepali coins and then back again before making them vanish into the air. News of these simple feats had spread quickly among the neighboring villages, arousing both curiosity and some alarm among the adult Sherpas. While magic of various forms had a clear place in this culture, it was odd for a white Westerner to even believe in magic, much less to display any such rapport with the invisibles. So the female jhankri glared at me when I first made my way to their hut; I realized that I was not welcome. Only by returning day after day, offering to help carry water up from the rushing stream, was I able to ease the initial antagonism. When her husband finally challenged me to show something of my own skill, I produced a brightly colored square of Sherpa cloth out of the air, then formed a small, empty pocket in the middle of the cloth, letting it dangle down from my fist. I invited the jhankri to blow upon the fabric. Then, singing softly, I opened the folds to reveal a gleaming quartz crystal. (The crystal was a talisman of mine that I’d been carrying in my pocket for most of a year.) The shaman took the quartz in his hand, holding it up to the sun. Then closing one eye, he brought the crystal close to the other, peering at me through its facets as he turned it this way and that. He asked if there were other crystals wanting to appear. I told him that I did not know, but that I hoped he would accept that crystal as a gift from the spirits. Perhaps I could teach him some of the mantras that I used for my magic? Of course I would, yes, if in exchange he would allow me to sit in on some of his healing sessions . . . It was a deal.
I moved into their household from the smaller family home where I’d been sleeping, and soon found myself accompanying the man, Dorjee, to a range of healings—usually in the evening and sometimes lasting the whole night.° Some of the healings were much stronger, in their feel, than others. In the most intense sessions Dorjee, aided by the rhythmic pounding on his dhyangro (a large two-sided drum), slipped into a kind of delirium.
