O KNOW THE SEASONS, look to plants. Wildflowers, especially, are excellent teachers. Their extravagant displays catch our attention. Their small, delicate bodies are beautifully, frighteningly permeable to the changing pulses of the world.
Plants feel seasonal changes in light, moisture, and heat like few other living beings. Plant cells feed on sunshine. Water wraps every root and coats the spongy interior of leaves. The body temperatures of plants fluctuate with those of their surroundings. This openness makes plants the primary interpreters of the seasons. The word “seasons” carries this knowledge in its origins. Descended from the Latin serere, meaning “to sow,” the word changed from verb to noun and came to mean not only the act of sowing crops, but the right time to sow.
Today, the seasons are convulsed by change. The “right time” feels terrifyingly destabilized. If plants teach us about the seasons, what are they telling us now?
Snorklewort
FOUR HUNDRED MILLION years ago, bubbles of magma pushed up through the Earth’s crust in what are now the outskirts of Atlanta, Georgia. As the softer rocks around them eroded, the hard magma bubbles remained. From a distance they now look like giant whales surfacing, their bare, smooth skin gleaming against a dark sea of oak and pine forest.
On a spring morning, we climb a whale’s back. The place is called Arabia Mountain, a name coined by quarry workers who compared the summer heat to the most sun-blasted place they could imagine. On a summer afternoon, the shadeless stone can reach 140 degrees Fahrenheit, too hot to touch. The sterilizing power of the sun keeps the whale’s skin stony smooth and almost free of plant life. Yet, a few plants not only persist, but make this oven their only home.
In pockmarks on the whale’s back, rain accumulates in puddles. These depressions were etched into the rock by millennia of slightly acidic rainfall. Most puddles drain or evaporate within days, but a few hold water throughout the winter and spring.
I lie down and peer through my hand lens: Paired oval leaves float on the water’s surface, each leaf only as big as a small lentil. At the center of some of these pairs grows a white flower about half the size of a peppercorn. A thread tethers the floating leaves to a rosette of spiky leaves rooted at the bottom of the puddle. The soil at the bottom is thin, just a couple of millimeters of coarse sand and oozy muck. This is snorklewort, a plant that lives on the edge of impossibility.
Ephemeral pools in rocks are snorklewort’s only home. The species lives on about three dozen rock outcrops in Georgia, Alabama, and South Carolina. Winter rain fills the pools and causes snorklewort seeds to germinate. The young plant grows into a submerged rosette, like a minuscule tuft of grass.
Rain and weak sunlight on warmer days sustain the growing rosettes through the early winter. As the days lengthen, the rosette grows its “snorkel,” a thread leading to a bud on the water’s surface. From the bud grow leaves and flower. The snorkel looks like a hose connecting a diver to the boat, but it carries no air and instead anchors the floating leaves, stopping breezes from washing them ashore. The flower is so small that my unaided eyes have trouble seeing it. On warmer days, tiny insects visit the blooms.
As spring progresses, the puddles dry faster in the ever-stronger sun, leaving a thin layer of damp, muddy sand. The flower matures to a tiny green fruit that encloses the seed, and the floating leaves lie prostrate in the muck. By early summer, the whole plant shrivels away. Mature seeds caught in the sand at the bottom of the depressions are snorklewort’s only connection to the future. They wait all summer and autumn, surviving the heat by sending their embryos into deep sleep, a dried-up suspended animation. When summer rainstorms refill the puddles to overflowing, the seeds are not fooled into germinating. Emergence anytime before the cold rains of winter would mean certain death.
No one has studied how snorklewort seedlings know when to burst out of their seedcoats and greet what they hope is a welcoming puddle. But, we know from other plant species that seeds have lucid dreams during their slumbers. Cells at the tip of the sleeping embryo keep up hormonal conversations among themselves that track temperature, moisture, and the passage of time. Eventually the chemical whispers jolt the rest of the embryo: wake up, let’s go, the world awaits!
Genes shape the seasonal chatter among plant cells. Every species has a different conversation underway in its seeds, each attuned to its home. The seasons live within, scribed into genes and physiology. Every species carries the pulse of home inside.
Snorklewort walks a fine line. If the pools dry out too fast, they cannot make floating leaves and flowers. If the pools hold too much soil, other plants like grasses and pine seedlings take over. If the pools contain too much dissolved minerals, algae grow profusely and smother the snorklewort. Yet, across millennia, snorklewort has yearly reseeded itself. In years when the rains are meager and pools do not fill, the rosettes grow backup flowers. These never open and instead self-fertilize and make inbred offspring. Not ideal, but essential insurance. Safeguards against swings in rainfall and heat caused by climate chaos will be harder to find.

