“Be a hollow bone,” Regina Lopez-Whiteskunk says as we look out toward Sleeping Ute Mountain on Nuche ancestral lands near her home in Towaoc, Colorado. “We can be a vessel that things move through.”
Standing inside this era of uncertainty, where climate collapse is converging with real threats to our democracy—regardless of one’s politics—we are in a season of change. Regina and I are both friends and neighbors in the Interior West. We have long devoted ourselves to the care of wild lands and wild lives, and the human communities that support land health, recognizing environmental justice is justice for all species, not just our own.
When seeking solace, I find my peace at home with the landscapes and people I live among in the hard times, especially in the hard times.
Be a hollow bone enters my mind in the season of winter at Great Salt Lake, where the palette on Antelope Island is not primary colors, but muted hues of salt-stained rocks and white alkaline flats, and a retreating saline lake whose color is a chameleon mirroring the sky from indigo blue to platinum to pink.
Walking the shores of this inland sea, I find a small bone bleached white—a hollow bone, a bird bone—bring it to my lips and blow. The sound is a haunting; once alive in the body of a bird in flight, it is now one chittering note.
My guess is this bone belonged to a grebe or a phalarope, eared grebe or red-necked or Wilson’s phalarope, to be precise, seasonal birds who arrive in late fall at Great Salt Lake in the thousands, hundreds of thousands, to feed and rest before venturing south to Mexico and South America.
Flocks of grebes are arriving now, migrating at night. Constellations of phalaropes have largely left, winging their way to Argentina for warmer weather. These are threatened species whose sole diets of brine shrimp and brine flies are declining as Great Salt Lake declines to historic lows, with salinity rates rising, deadly to the shrimp and fly populations. There is no separation between a healthy grebe and phalarope population and a healthy human population along the Wasatch Front. All of our lives are threatened by a shrinking Great Salt Lake.
It is a perilous time for the Great Salt Lake ecosystem. Forrest Cuch, a Ute elder, spoke at a recent rally in front of the Utah State Capital. He spoke of how his ancestors depended on this ecosystem for deer and ducks to eat; for the adjacent stands of cottonwood, aspen, and willows to shelter and warm them; and for salt to cure meat. Salt was also used in ceremony. Facing west toward this imperiled water body, he said: “We must protect our Mother Lake—our sacred Mother Lake to whom we all belong.” Forrest invited over a thousand citizens at the rally to face Great Salt Lake with him as we chanted together, “Our Sacred Mother Lake,” “Our Sacred Mother Lake,” “Our Sacred Mother Lake,” “Our Sacred Mother Lake,” toward the horizon, now a line of quicksilver in the last light of day.
We can be a vessel that things move through. This landscape of gentle grasses covering the rolling hills all the way up the flanks of Antelope Island’s steep and rocky ridge, where Frary Peak presides twenty-five hundred feet above the lake, is restful. What appear to be black boulders dotting the blonde fields are bison breathing. They are the descendants of the plains bison, once numbering sixty million, who thundered through the prairies prior to the colonization of America.
The poet Eliza R. Snow, plural wife of the Mormon prophet Joseph Smith and, after his death, a plural wife of prophet and colonizer Brigham Young, wrote in her palm-size leather journal in sepia ink while crossing the plains from Omaha, Nebraska, to the Great Salt Lake Valley, “June 30, 1847: … This is truly the land of the buffalo—They are in sight all the time an almost imnuberable herd and then came over the bluff—about to cross our camp—on their path to the river—our hunters met them and they changed their course much to our gratification.” A few pages later: “Nothing remarkable except the multiplying of buffalo pattys which [is] bad from the bluff to the river. Saw buffalo and wolves.” She goes on to write, “Capt. G brought me a buffalo skull on which was written by the Pioneers, ‘All well, feed bad.’ Was only 300 miles from SLC,” dated May 9.
A small herd of twelve bison (four males, four females, and four calves) were introduced on Antelope Island in 1893 by private landowners who brought them by train to Utah and ferried them across Great Salt Lake by boat. The herd is now “owned” by the state of Utah. In 2025, there are roughly seven hundred bison roaming free on the forty-two square miles of Antelope Island State Park, now a peninsula because of the retreating saline waters.
Scientists tell us this particular herd is among the wildest genetic population remaining on the continent, as they were originally culled from the historic bison herds not yet marbled with the genes of cattle, so common in bison today. The wild bison on Antelope Island must hold in their DNA an ancestral memory and verisimilitude of their coexistence with Indigenous communities across much of North America. Do the bison also hold the memory of the genocide inflicted upon them? White settlers’ dreams of western expansion were predicated on the deliberate wholesale slaughter of bison to “clear the land of Indians,” knowing that if they killed all the buffalo, Native communities would be starved not only of their primary food source, but their cultures, which evolved alongside the buffalo, as well. The bison and the Plains Indian cultures were one.

