The Cairngorm Mountains of north-east Scotland are Britain’s Arctic. In winter, storm winds of up to 170 miles per hour rasp the upper shires of the range, and avalanches scour its slopes. Even in high summer, snow still lies in the deepest corries, sintering slowly into ice. The Northern Lights flare green and red above its summits. The wind is so strong that on the plateau there are bonsai pines, fully grown at six inches, and juniper bushes which flatten themselves across the rocks to form densely woven dwarf forests. Two of Scotland’s great rivers — the Dee and the Avon — have their sources there: falling as rain, filtered by rock, pooling as the clearest water into which I have ever looked, and then running seawards with gathering strength. The range itself is the eroded stump of a mass of magma that rose up through the earth’s crust in the Devonian, cooled into granite, then emerged out of the surrounding schists and gneiss. The Cairngorms were once higher than today’s Alps, but over billennia they have been eroded into a low-slung wilderness of whale-backed hills and shattered cliffs. Born of fire, carved by ice, finessed with wind, water and snow, the massif is a terrain shaped by what Nan Shepherd — in her slender masterpiece about the region, The Living Mountain — calls ‘the elementals’. Anna ‘Nan’ Shepherd was born near Aberdeen in 1893 and died there in 1981, and during her long life she spent hundreds of days and thousands of miles exploring the Cairngorms on foot. For decades her reputation rested on her three fine modernist novels, The Quarry Wood (1928), The Weatherhouse (1930) and A Pass in the Grampians (1933), all set in small communities in north-east Scotland, and all concerned with strong young women making their way against the current of convention. But to my mind her most important book was a work of non-fiction, The Living Mountain, written in the 1940s but not published until 1977. Shepherd was a localist of the best kind: she came to know her chosen place closely, but that closeness served to deepen rather than to limit her vision. She had a modest middle-class upbringing and what looked like a modestly regional life: she attended Aberdeen High School for Girls, graduated from Aberdeen University in 1915 and was appointed to the staff of the Aberdeen Training Centre for Teachers, where she became a full-time lecturer in 1919 and from which she retired in 1956 (she wryly characterized her role there as the ‘heaven-appointed task of trying to prevent a few of the students who pass through our Institution from conforming altogether to the approved pattern’). She travelled widely — including to Norway, France, Italy, Greece and South Africa — but lived for eighty-eight years in the same house in the Deeside village of Cults, now a suburb of Aberdeen. ‘I have had the same bedroom all my life!’ she once said, gladly. The house was called Dunvegan, and it was a two-storey granite Victorian villa sunk in its own steeply sloping grounds, with a pine-treed garden backing onto the railway line. Inside, it was a maze of curtained alcoves, frosted glass, oak-lined corridors, worn flagstones, and stairs that led upwards into shadow. The house served as Shepherd’s retreat and also — in time — as a defence against those who were curious about her own refusal to conform “altogether to the approved pattern’. For she never married, was never known to be in a relationship, and devoted the second half of her life to the care first of her mother, and then of her housekeeper and friend, Mary ‘Mamie’ Lawson. Dunvegan was Nan’s demesne; the Cairngorms, which rose to the west of her home, were her heartland. Into and out of those mountains she went in all seasons, by dawn, day, dusk and night, walking sometimes alone, and sometimes with friends, students or fellow hikers from the Deeside Field Club. She had use of a howff above Braemar on the side of Morrone, which served as a base for exploring the southern reaches of the range, and access to a shepherd’s bothy north of the Lairig Ghru which was equipped with camp beds and sleeping bags. Like all true mountain-lovers, she got altitude sickness if she spent too long at sea level. From a young age, Nan was hungry for life. She seems to have lived with a great but quiet gusto. Writing to a friend about a photograph of her as a toddler, she describes herself as ‘all movement, legs and arms flailing as though I were demanding to get at life — I swear those limbs move as you look at them’. Intellectually, she was what Coleridge once called a ‘library-cormorant’ — omnivorous and voracious in her reading. On 7 May 1907, aged fourteen, she started the first of what she called her ‘medleys’ — commonplace books into which she copied literary, religious and philosophical citations, and which reveal the breadth of her reading as a young woman. An extraordinary studio portrait exists of Shepherd as a university student. Her chin is tilted up, and she stares out of the top right of the frame, as if at a far-off prospect of hills. She is wearing a brocaded blouse and a broad headband with a jewel set into its centre. Her hair is parted down the middle, and thick glossy plaits tumble either side of her brow. The overall appearance is faintly Native American, without any implication of parody or foolish fancy-dress.