Columbine flowers found that American bees were ready to take up the work of their Asian cousins. The columbines spread out over much of the North American continent. As the plants expanded their range, they were visited by strange new pollinators, creatures entirely unlike any the plants’ ancestors had encountered. These oddities hovered in front of the flowers on thrumming wings and dipped their needle-like beaks into the columbines’ nectar spurs. Columbines, meet hummingbirds! Hummingbirds, found only in the Americas, offered columbines new possibilities for partnership.
Thanks to genetic variability within columbines, a few plants discovered that, although bees are nice, hummingbirds can be better. Genetic mutations in some of these plants turned columbine flowers from blue to red. Because hummingbird eyes are attracted to anything red, these new hues drew more pollinating birds. As they adapted to hummingbirds, the columbines lost their aromas, and petal landing pads for bees shrunk. The flowers also straightened and lengthened their nectar spurs to better accommodate hummingbird beaks.
In eastern North America, red columbines shifted their flowering season to match the seasonal migration of the hummingbirds. In Atlanta, for example, the flowers come into bloom exactly when springtime waves of migrating ruby-throated hummingbirds pass through, the birds thrilling in sugar hits that will power their perilous northbound journeys. Farther north, where the wave of migrants is more modest and spread out, the red columbine waits to bloom until all the hummingbirds have settled on their breeding territories.
North American columbines remade themselves in the image of hummingbirds, an impressive innovation. But they were not done with genetic exploration. The longer nectar spurs of the hummingbird-pollinated columbines also attracted the attentions of hawkmoths. These large moths have proboscises many times longer than their bodies, making hummingbird beaks look puny. Another pollinator, another opportunity for evolution to get creative.
Using the hummingbird-lengthened spurs as starting points, columbines evolved even longer spurs. These eventually got so long that they now look like tresses flowing back from the blooms of species such as the golden and longspur columbines. To further encourage hawkmoths, the flowers tipped their faces toward the sky instead of hanging them down as they do for bees and hummingbirds. They also regained the floral aromas that had been useless for attracting hummingbirds. The petals changed from red to white, yellow, or sometimes blue, colors that hawkmoths love. Hawkmoths fly mostly at night and at dawn and dusk, so the flowers are nectar-filled and aromatic even at night and when the light is dim. They bloom when the hawkmoths are most active: mid-summer in the mountains and early spring in the deserts and along the coasts. Unlike other hawkmoth specialist flowers, such as some wild tobaccos, columbines do not open exclusively at night, perhaps to keep their options open with bumblebees and hummingbirds.
Hawkmoths also live in Asia and Europe, but no columbine there evolved superlong nectar spurs. Only in North America, where the hummingbirds served as an evolutionary stepping stone, did these long spurs appear. Sometimes one innovation leads to another.
Not all American columbines evolved to work with hummingbirds and hawkmoths. A few, like smallflower columbine in western Canada, stuck to the tried-and-true ancestral habit of working with bees and kept their short, often curved spurs and blue colors. A few, in one population of the Rocky Mountain columbine, have even lost their spurs. This makes the flowers less attractive to pollinators but is a good defense against excessive herbivory by deer and aphids. Today, twenty-five species and subspecies of columbines bloom all over North America, from the boreal forest, western coasts, desert southwest, to the forests of the east. Each columbine species has its own spur length and shape, color, and blooming time, matched to the preferences of pollinating and flower-eating animals.
For flowers, the seasons are made and marked by relationships with animal partners. These relationships involve timing but are also mediated by the match between the plants and their animals’ bodies and senses. The genes that control the colors and shapes of flowers, then, have within them a memory or understanding of animals. The “other” is living inside, in the script of DNA. When humans get involved, these relationships can be severed or befuddled. Some cultivated varieties of columbine are mutants whose DNA causes the flowers to grow frilly stacks of petals, like Elizabethan ruffs. These cultivars often also lack nectar spurs. Pollinators find it hard to reach through the swarm of petals and, even when they do, often encounter no reward. The flowers are pleasing to human eyes, but for pollinators, many of them might as well be concrete garden gnomes. Horticulture, by attempting to improve on flowers whose existence long predates the human species, sometimes destroys the very relationships with pollinators that first built the flowers. But, gardeners can also tend and sustain these relationships. Planting or encouraging indigenous wildflowers is one way of cultivating our own belonging within the seasons of home. A few colorful gnomes are surely fine, but mostly our gardens should sustain local life, not offer empty promises.
I watch from my window in Atlanta as the first ruby-throated hummingbirds of the spring dip their beaks into red columbine blooms. The birds zip to the flowers, approaching from below. They hold themselves almost vertically and poke their beaks into the bell-like openings, finding a perfect fit between beak and the flowers’ long petal spurs. I see hummingbird tongues flashing and throats pumping. The swollen tips on each petal are full of nectar. Their heads dusted with pollen, the hummingbirds move from bloom to bloom. When night falls and the birds continue their migration north, they will be powered by columbine sugar, a gift from long-ago Asian immigrants who made new homes in the many seasons of the Americas. 
