There has been a drought for ten years and us-two are out on stone country near Tibooburra in northwestern New South Wales with some Elders, singing a rain song. We’re excited but the old fellas are not, because they can see the pattern and we’re having trouble seeing beyond the deep-down thrill of power, the possibility whispered from our emu/frilly lizard egos, I can control the weather. I am greater-than. So we miss the pattern and see only drought relief and rivers flowing strong again and a hell of a story to tell around the fire. We are children who don’t know what else will come from this and we don’t give it a second thought. So we sing and we dance up a storm.
What the old fellas can see are the beetles already climbing the riverbank and the swifts flying urgently and close to the ground because they know what is coming, signalling all the other animals to move to high ground and plants to shift their energies into strengthening their roots. Gidjirr trees also signal a warning by emitting a powerful scent that smells like rotting broccoli. The long-suffering sheep and cattle and cotton crops don’t catch these signals though, and even if they did they are incapable of moving with country or digging in. Their owners have fenced in their livestock and are watching meteorology reports on television, in houses built on floodplains.
The rivers will flow and then burst their banks and overrun the levees around small towns. Shops will close and families will go hungry for a while. The rivers will flow again but that water will be halted by dams at Menindee and released when the appropriate officers see fit. It will change things in multiple systems in three different states. It will be halted again by floodgates at the Murray River mouth and released into the sea months later, creating the dynamic mix of fresh and salt that the sacred system of the Coorong depends upon but hasn’t seen in years.
There will be a dust storm that will sweep across the state from Tibooburra and cover Sydney in red earth. Elders there will see this as a big ceremonial action marking the streets and buildings and people with the colour of red ochre. People will have to replace their stained clothing and the malls will experience a spike in trade. The red dirt will go into the sea and cause a massive algal bloom, clearing the air in a huge carbon sink while temporarily restoring fish stocks as they feast on this sudden abundance. Unemployed fishermen will enjoy a brief revival of their industry and markets will fluctuate along with the queues at Centrelink as welfare demands fall and then rise again when the fish are decimated once more. Inland, settlers who had abandoned their dusty properties and left small towns in droves will return with the green grass and the Aboriginal residents will be in the minority again. The activities of the police force will ramp up along with rents and housing prices.
It takes a long time before the water reaches the mouth of the Murray River, long enough for us-two to travel down to the Coorong to be present for the moment when the floodgates are opened. There are dead penguins and seal carcasses washed up on the beach and the place feels post-apocalyptic, as we stand on the sand and wait for the freshwater to come.
We see it tumbling towards us, swirling and frothing while, out to sea, shapes are moving in the deep. They spiral and play there frantically and one of them breaks away and swims towards us. He arrives at the shore just as the freshwater hits in the same place and he lumbers across the sand to sit in front of us.
This is not like any seal we’ve seen before. He has a beard and is barking in a human language our brains don’t recognise, but that resonates somewhere deep in our bones. He glares at us with his fathomless eyes, then turns and shuffles back into the sea.
Everything is creation and there are always patterns to perceive. If wombats are on the move, the sap is running in the gum trees and it’s time to cut bark. If the tea trees are flowering, lychees and cherries will be available at the supermarket, where ‘Jingle Bell Rock’ will be playing in an interminable loop. Controls preventing capital flight are announced in one country, so in another country the real estate market will plummet and interest rates will come down in response to rising unemployment. Loans will be taken out to fund infrastructure projects that will buoy up the construction industry, the biggest employer. Later, there will be cuts made to social programs when those loans need to be repaid. And then there is the weather.
In the US a couple hires a weather modification company to prevent it from raining on their wedding day and there is a forest fire in their district two weeks later. Elsewhere, iron filings are dumped in the ocean to create algal blooms for carbon capture experiments in climate engineering. Silver oxide is sprayed in the sky to seed clouds for rain, temporarily clearing the pollution from a city that is hosting a sporting event. Thailand innovates a cloud-seeding technique that makes it a world leader in the field, while online companies advertise their weather control expertise to governments all over the world.
I see on the website for Weather Modification Incorporated that an Australian state government agency has procured equipment, pilots and training for an extensive cloud-seeding project involving the spraying of toxic elements in the sky. 

