You sit up rubbing the sleep out of your eyes, then you leap off the bed and run out of the room in search of your mama, screaming “Mama!” at the top of your lungs. I smile at your little-limbed enthusiasm, the happy spring in your steps, the way the strong golden light of Chennai’s sun conspires with that moment to paint a portrait of joy. Though I still need to snuggle into the sheets a bit longer, I can no longer close my eyes. Your life is infectious.
You’ve been looking forward to this for some time now. Lali is tending to our small garden in the balcony, and you want to help. Lali says you can help. You jump on the bed where I am still laid out in a lazy heap of yawns and half-smiles, and you scream into my ears: “Dada! Wake up, Dada!” Ten more minutes, I plead—recalling my all-night writing vigil, but my soft protests fall on ears too bewitched by the playful melodies of the morning to register an adult’s excuse. Your mother appears through the balcony door, tall and gracious, with strands of midnight curled around her head, and beads of sweat anointing her forehead. She asks me to help fetch a bucket of water from the bathroom. “I’ll do it! I’ll do it myself,” you scream, racing ahead of me to turn on the tap of water into the green bucket. I climb out of bed sulking and get to the bathroom door just as the water pours. The thin stream beats hollow rhythms as it impacts the plastic. You turn to me, standing by the door of the bathroom. We lock eyes. And we smile.
Your helping often comes at a cost, though: it has to be total and exclusive. As the water fills two-thirds of the bucket, I turn off the tap and lift the bucket. Your immediate outburst of muffled cry-speaking tells me I’ve crossed a line again. It takes a little while before I figure out you want to lift the bucket yourself. So I make you an offer: let’s do it together, shall we? You nod your head gently. I lift the bucket by its handle, and ask you to help by resting your hand on mine. And so we gently bear the precious cargo a few feet to the barricaded balcony, where your mum kneels by several earthen pots out of which proceed aloe vera, tulasi, mint, cactus, and tomato plants. She is plucking away brown leaves, pruning and watching for little caterpillars that leave holes in the leaves.
“Have you said good morning to the plants, dear?” I ask. I have taught you in the past that these plants feed you, nourish you, and mother you—and that our love wouldn’t be complete without their material participation.
So you place your palms together, close to your chest, and then you do a soft, gentle bow. “Good mo-o-orning, plants!” you say to each one, letting your fingers touch a leaf here, a tender sinewy stalk there, or the rich brown soil we’ve cradled them in. With a small plastic cup, you and mama water the plants, giggling as bits of soil fly everywhere. Unlike the sound water makes when it streams into a plastic bucket, the deep thrumming bass of watered soil betrays a nobler partnership. The hum of very old friends. A beautiful entanglement.
This almost-daily ritual has turned our balcony into a small Eden. A miniature version of the hanging gardens of Nebuchadnezzar gracing this little city of little bodies and little gestures.
These moments are home. For now.
Our apartment is like most new apartments in Chennai—a cell in a beehive. Or rather a hole—one of many—in a slice of Swiss cheese. It isn’t “small”; it’s “necessary.” Our street is narrow and crammed with necessary homes piled on top of homes, most of which share the same walls. There are no rooftops, just flat terraces and clotheslines as far as the eyes can see.
Down the street, there’s very often a large cow, seemingly at guard at the very entrance of our small avenue. She doesn’t begrudge the strange visitor; she just sits there, her horns painted blue and red, her forehead touched with a finger dipped in turmeric paste. Slowly munching the food some passers-by often leave her with gentle bows and palms gently pressed to their foreheads, she welcomes barking stray dog, African immigrant, and buzzing auto-rickshaw. And when the time is right, when blue gods seated on lithic thrones lean closer to gaze, when the stars align, and her bowels nod their fleshy consent, she spills on the concrete-slab street, her urine gushing like a burst government pipe, anointing the hard road. This is a blessing to all those that know that the things that most repel and disgust us are our sacred life-keepers—if we learn to meet them anew. A few feet away from her massive frame lies a dried-out chunk of shit, pressed down in the middle where motorcycle tire tracks mark it. Those brown tread marks will continue for a while until fading, often leading into the street Viji-ma comes from, every morning, to clean our apartment. She will often come with gifts—some Samba rice and pepper water or neem leaves. Or a strong rebuke for Lali for not giving me food. We couldn’t possibly pay her for what she does.

