Many years ago I journeyed through Southeast Asia, making my way as an itinerant sleight-of-hand magician, performing on street corners and at small family inns. One afternoon, I found myself walking alone between two tiny hamlets high in the Nepali Himalayas, under a towering mountain called Ama Dablam by the Sherpa villagers. All day long I'd been gazing the resplendent southwest visage of this mountain, its features etched with snow and ice, watching its expressions shift with the angle of the sun as | hiked up the narrow trail. In midafternoon I took off my backpack to rest for a moment, gulping some water and glancing behind me. I saw then that the monsoon clouds were slowly ascending the southern valleys at my back. I hoisted my pack and quickened my pace, with the intent to reach my destination—the isolated home of a Sherpa jhankri, or shaman—while the visibility was still good. But one appendage of that cloud mass seemed to advance more rapidly than the rest, climbing the slopes at the base of Ama Dablam; soon it was caressing the sharp edge of the mountain wall. I stopped to watch, bowing low to the mountain, thanking it for the indulgence of its companionship and for its protection (Ama means “mother” in Sherpa, as it does in many other languages) as the cloud slowly came between Ama Dablam and my eyes. For a while I caught glimpses of the mountain’s ravishing face through various rents and rifts in the cloud, but then the white mass thickened, and I could no longer see it. Ama Dablam was gone. Trying to feel its implacable presence behind the gaseous miasma, I was astonished to discover that I could no longer sense the mountain at all. I was no more able to feel the presence of that looming peak, now, than I was able to see it. The mountain, whose majestic bulk had commanded my attention for most of the day, had simply vanished. 
It was the purest disappearance I’d ever witnessed—no doubt because the entity who was suddenly not there was a being of such immutable power, a great wave of earth whose adamant eloquence had been conversing with my sweating body for so many strenuous hours. It occurred to me then, staring across the boulder-strewn pass into the swirling vapor, that here was the truest archetype for my craft as a sleight-of-hand magician. I must strive to make my silver coins and my billiard balls vanish as completely as this cloud had coaxed the entire mountain to vanish, transforming an immense colossus of rock and ice into a fleeting phantom, a mere memory. To this day, whenever I roll a silver dollar across my knuckles, preparing to make it disappear, I bow subtly toward the remembered mountain and the monsoon clouds—an apprentice honoring his masters. 
Sleight-of-hand relies entirely on the dimension of depth, since this dimension alone empowers nearby surfaces to hide farther ones, enabling the back of a relaxed hand to conceal a ball gently gripped in its palm. The same depth that empowers clouds to dissolve cliffs also allows the dangling folds of a previously empty scarf to conceal a patient rabbit held behind them. Yet depth can also work its magic entirely out in the open. While strolling barefoot along a beach you might glimpse, in the near distance, a discarded tire half-buried in the sand, its worn-out treads exposed to the sun and salt spray. If you stroll closer, however, you may see that tire suddenly metamorphose into a dozing seal that rouses and barks, gruffly, at your approach, and then galumphs into the water. Some months before my extended trek in the Himalayas, I was exploring a wild peninsula jutting into the Indian Ocean from the south coast of Java. It was a sweltering hot day, with no breeze to ease the thickness; I had peeled off my sweat-soaked shirt and tied it round my waist. Emerging from some woods into a wide field above the sea, I saw that a wind was jostling the leaves and swaying the branches of some trees on the far side of the clearing. Grateful, I made my way toward that grove in order to feel the moving air on my damp skin. As I got close to those trees, however, the apparent wind bending their branches abruptly transformed into a band of monkeys foraging for food among their leaves. There was no breeze at all, only a bunch of primates better adapted to the heat than I. 
Such perceptual transformations are endemic to a reality that exists only in depth—a reality that discloses itself to us only by holding some part of itself in the uncertain distance, a world that we encounter only in the tension between the nearby and the yonder. The dimension of depth is ruled by Proteus, the shapeshifting god, whose dominion over sensory experience teaches us to stay loose, to invite magic, to expect metamorphosis. While lying bellydown on the grass one afternoon, my head propped on one hand as the other turned the page of a novel, I took vague note of an airplane soaring far above at the very periphery of my vision, then became alarmed when its engine grew louder and I sensed it beginning a nosedive. Only as I frantically twisted my torso to stare did the careening plane suddenly transform, resolving into a buzzing bottle fly walking down the right lens of my eyeglasses.
