I have often wandered past our neighbor’s apartment, her door flung open, with all the goings-on in full view of passers-by. Me? I grew up behind closed doors, and was trained in the high art of landing a good knock on the door. Where there’s no bell to ring, three taps, four well-spaced sighs, and—if still no response—three taps. Or maybe two. Just in case you are not wanted. The point is that I grew up with a fairly rigid sense of privacy—a very Victorian sensibility about where my space begins and where yours ends—tempered only by some sentimental account of the goodness of African hospitality. In Kutti’s shack, I quickly learn, there is literally no time or space for such frivolities. Space is performed differently here, not as a limited resource or a private chamber for one’s own air supply. Everything bleeds into everything else, and in this scandalous perversion of boundaries, politeness is often fatuous. Well, I won’t be asked twice: I move the items on the chairs to a side, and make myself as comfortable as I can. Though this is my third time visiting Kutti and his wife, Geetha, I will be staying here for the first time tonight. I had asked him if I could stay over a week ago, and though I couldn’t make out what he had said prior to a friend translating his response, the way he threw his hands and smiled felt like he was saying “Please come! Why even bother asking?” So I look around, taking it all in. Looking for insight. Looking to be spoken to. Trying to force a question or two from the way the objects are arranged, the way dust lingers beneath my now unshod feet. I notice that the rough and uneven walls are constructed with red bricks, their earthen hues seeping through the aqua-green emulsion that pretends to cover them away. I run my fingers lightly across the gritty surface of the wall behind me, as if to entice it out of its stony silence. As if to reduce its empirical vagaries into the reliability of words, sentences, and story. As if to tickle out an epiphany. Farther into the room, on an asymmetric shelf designed with painted stone slabs—embedded into the largest wall—an incredible diversity of items sits frozen in dust behind thick sinewy spider webs. A small television set in the far corner of one of the cluttered compartments of the shelf harks back to the questionable policies of a previous Tamil Nadu government, which had—in its efforts to alleviate extreme poverty—embarked on a scheme to distribute free fourteen-inch television sets across the state. What do you think, dear? Does this not create nail-biting window-shoppers out of these people, who must now treat every flashy ad that blazes across their screens as a capitalist indictment of their precarity? It is unclear to me how the television helps Geetha sweep the floors, bathe her children, or tend to Kutti’s mother, who lives in an even smaller box a few feet away. And yet, am I too quick to reduce these people to victims? To strip them down to some kind of basic (and necessary) subsistence, and thus denying them the frivolity and complexity I allow myself?

Five feet above, a tiny fan with short thumb-like blades spins rapidly, every hectic revolution jolting the rod that connects it to a bamboo stick, which in turn acts as a support beam for the asbestos sheets that are both roof and ceiling. Broomsticks and wooden canes stick out from the dips of the undulating sheets. In a corner of the room, a dirty worn-out cricket bat rests against the wall. My gaze slides to a framed painting of young deity Krishna with an older woman. Nesting close to their blue-skinned nobility is a framed picture of Kutti and Geetha, which opens into the tiny space that is the kitchen. There’s an oxblood fridge in there, a gas cooker connected to an orange gas cylinder, a stone slab upon which rest endless stacks of steel pots, tiny plastic containers, a bunch of bright yellow bananas, and rusty cooking utensils of every tribe and shape mounted on a wall holder. The kitchen ceiling hangs so low that I hit my head on its fan when Geetha invites me to survey the place. As I retake my seat next to Kutti and Velu, she generously offers me drinking water in a dented steel cup. I thank her and take a sip. The water tastes like something. Water shouldn’t do that. I am taunting myself, querying my motives, second-guessing the appropriateness of my very presence, even as the scribe within scours every material surface, every turn of texture, every whiff of feeling for story. For meaning. For a hush. I feel like an extraterrestrial prospector, looking for a new home, inspecting the ruins of a forsaken planet, probing it for life—for signs that it can support my narrative. And yet—as elitist as that sounds—I question if I am even doing it “properly.” If I were employing traditional qualitative research modalities—especially of the phenomenological kind—I might have articulated guiding interview questions to orient myself in the “field,” to help me know what to look for, and when to know I am saturated with enough responses and insights that it feels safe to leave.