We live in an age where identity, by whatever key, places us in pigeonholes. By race, ethnicity, gender/nongender, geography, political affiliation, occupation, and even vaccination status, we nest in certain identities where we are accepted by some and rejected by others. There are nests we choose but also those that are chosen for us. Although most term the current epoch the “Anthropocene,” the Age of Humans, I eschew this label in favor of my own tag: the “Ident-ocene—the Age of Who-ness.” It is in our identities—chosen and/or cast upon us—that we often worry over how to understand past sins, resolve present predicaments, and reweave who we’ve been and what we’ve done into better futures.
Identifying things is what I do for a living. An ornithologist and bird-watcher for most of my life, I’ve spent more than fifty years obsessed with identifying winged feathered beings. It’s become almost a reflex to call out a bird’s name as I would that of a good friend or family member. With that kind of familial intimacy, I follow the lives and plights of birds too. My work is to understand them so that I can teach others to respect and protect them. It just so happens that I am a Black man in a predominantly White field, and that does matter. Not to the birds, but to those who share my passion for watching and conservation.
Birders identify birds without consideration of their own identity. And while bird-watching can be an escape from the larger societal ills that often weigh us down, incidents like the verbal assault on a Black birder in Central Park—which made some of my longtime birder friends reluctant to venture forth, fearing the rising racism/bias and violence directed at their identities—remind us that no hobby is an island. One shouldn’t look up at spring warblers while trampling wildflowers underfoot. Being circumspect is a righteous thing. The flower certainly appreciates the consideration and, on account of that kindness, has the opportunity to bloom on. Oblivion can be a cruel privilege. The stepped-on thing is injured, crushed to death, perhaps, by a heedless passerby who doesn’t care beyond the next bird or is hurrying on. We must take the binoculars down to see the wider field of view, to not step on the unseen, to take history and its long trajectory into account.
As we search for western species ID’d with White men’s names, like Lewis’s woodpecker or Clark’s nutcracker, we should consider the impacts of Native genocide and land grabs in the American West—the places where ideals of wildness and wilderness protection reach pinnacles. Can we really celebrate ideals of untrammeled nature where whole nations were exterminated and the remainder forced into refugee status?
And should we ignore the history of enslavement on lands shaped by Black hands that now serve as conservation sites for struggling wildlife? In Lowcountry rice marshes, for example, endangered black ducks and black rails likely stand more of a chance because of what enslavement wrought back then. Hundreds of thousands of acres of forests were destroyed and millions of tons of mud moved—banked in dikes that if piled skyward could’ve been mountains—to grow Carolina gold rice. Structures called “trunks” and “gates,” engineered by the same Black bodies to hold the tide and then release it, weren’t just the products of free labor, but technology brought from Africa. Can we celebrate this altered landscape, now seen as beneficial for birds, without remembering the untold torture and terror that happened here to make White men filthy rich?
How do we view the people—the flesh-and-bone “monuments”—who built conservation and environmentalism in oblivion, ignoring truths of the wrongs done? Do we dethrone the heroes we’ve placed on a pedestal by remembering they were racist or grave robbers? Should we? Flip that coin to the other side. Why don’t we give higher standing to those who fought for good on multiple fronts? Does being an abolitionist and a birder diminish the latter? What responsibilities does one have beyond identifying birds properly by sight or sound?
As birding begins to reckon with its past in response to societal unrest and bias, we have a chance to consider two historical contemporaries who shared the privilege of White maleness in a white-supremacist country, undergirded by laws protecting, and an economy promoting, enslavement. They could both go about their wild, wandering business without worrying beyond the next bird they might see. One did just that. The other didn’t. Here, I offer the chance to drop in on a hypothetical letter exchange concerning two sides of an issue that would ultimately tear America apart. Two birding men: John James Audubon, the famed “father” of North American ornithology whose painted field guide, The Birds of America, serves as a holy text for birding, and who was also an enslaver; and Henry David Thoreau, the transcendentalist naturalist of Walden fame, whose anti-slavery activism is often whitewashed in favor of more “comfortable” narratives about his solitude-seeking ways. Each of them might be called “men of their time”—but then one made choices to stay stuck in the sins of the time, while the other chose to find a place on the right side of it.
What might one say to the other about something much more controversial than the identity of a sparrow? What differences might arise amid an earnest letter exchange between these two men who, despite their shared love of nature, are not aligned on the issues of their time? Here, I would ask that you suspend probability for the sake of possibility and expand outward into the imagining with me.

