The next day, my birthday, was one of the most charmed of my life. Blue-resin sky, coppery sun, a white wind. It passed with the deep, easy happiness of a castaway day; I had no imperative other than to spend it in the most enjoyable manner possible. All but one of the other boats sailed early, leaving the Shiants in a spray of routes. Ian and I, along with a kind couple called Rob and Karen on whose boat we had been made welcome the night before, decided to stay for at least another night. The winds were changing, and we wouldn’t be able to push on south to Harris, so we wanted to make the most of the islands we had reached. Walking, exploring, beachcombing, up and over the tops of the hills and along the shores, our small group drifting along together and then pulling apart. I scrambled down rock to a westerly headland and fished from slabs – grippy with barnacles, slippery with kelp – that slanted down into the water. I caught a big pollock, five or six pounds  – bronze-on-silver flanks, coal-shovel tail  – lured from the weed forests with a spinner. Where it was still, the water was jelly-clear. Between the rocks it chopped and sneezed. Under arches and overhangs, it was dark as mafic glass. I climbed to the top of Eilean an Taighe and followed its southeastern cliff-edges. Below me were wave-smashed theatres of rock: echoey sea caves, and bird-filled zawns. Here and there I flopped onto my belly and peered over the brink, looking down to where the sea shampooed the rocks and listening to the yabber of the seabirds. Tiers of birds were in flight, dividing the air into strata: kittiwakes and fulmars, then puffins, then gannets. I felt a sensation of candour and amplitude, of the body and mind opened up, of thought diffusing at the body’s edges rather than ending at the skin. The light as a weir pouring over the edge of Europe. At the high point of Eilean an Taighe was a slung hammock of rock that had been heated by the sun. At noon or so I lay shirtless and shoeless in it, a comfortable Crusoe, looking eastwards over the main channel of the Minch. Tide and wave were writing their scripts upon the blue water: white wind glyphs, curled from the air in markings that reminded me of the patterns on the backs of spiders or of Arabic lettering. Later in the afternoon, I sat facing west towards the dropping sun and read Adam Nicolson’s fine book Sea Room, a study of the islands by one of their former ‘owners’, a copy of which I had found in the island’s only current habitation, a whitewashed bothy. Nicolson had inherited the islands from his father, but had never considered himself anything other than their temporary paper-possessor. He had left them free for visitors, and kept the bothy hospitably maintained and open. 20‘The Shiants . . . are not really a lonely place,’ Nicolson remarks in the first chapter of his book. ‘That is a modern illusion . . . for most of their history . . . they were profoundly related to the world in which they were set.’ Their position in the centre of the Atlantic seaways meant that they had been a stopping-off point for sea journeys for 5,000 years, a safe harbour in the mid-Minch. ‘Our modern view of such [islands] as orphans or widows, drenched in a kind of Dickensian poignancy of abandonment, is, on the whole, wrong,’ he continues. They are in fact:
the hub for millions of bird and animals lives, as dynamic as any trading floor, a theatre of competition and enrichment. They are the centre of their own universe, the organising node in a web of connections, both human and natural, which extends first to the surrounding seas, then to the shores on all sides and beyond that, along the seaways that stretch for thousands of miles along the margins of the Atlantic and on into the heartlands of Europe. I like that image of the ‘web of connections’: the seaways leading, like Thomas’s land paths, ‘from everywhere to everywhere’, joining deep ocean to coastal shelf to estuary to river to back country. I also recognize Nicolson’s account of having been chronically ‘shaped’ by his ‘island times’ on the Shiants. 21‘The place has entered me,’ he wrote adoringly, ‘it has coloured my life like a stain.’ Small islands have often inspired dreams of total knowledge in those who love them. I had read the work of several islomaniacs over the years  – Tim Robinson’s deep topographies of the Irish Aran islands, Nicolson on the Shiants and Lawrence Durrell on Corfu, as well as Nan Shepherd’s study of her inland-island of the Cairngorm massif, and Gilbert White ’s record of his Hampshire parish of Selborne. All these people had been animated at first by 22 the delusion of a comprehensive totality, the belief that they might come to know their chosen place utterly because of its boundedness. And all had, after long acquaintance, at last understood that familiarity with a place might lead not to absolute knowledge but only ever to further enquiry. For Shepherd, the Cairngorm massif was not a crossword to be cracked, full of encrypted ups and downs. Greater understanding of the mountain’s interrelations served only to reveal other realms of incomprehension. She didn’t relish her discoveries so much as her ignorance: 23‘The mind cannot carry away all that the mountain has to give,’ she wrote, ‘nor does it always believe possible what it has carried away.’
