iv. Methods
Laurie was eager to begin, but she hadn’t met Sweetgrass before. “It’s
the grass that will teach you,” I advised, “so you have to get to know it.” I took her out to our restored sweetgrass meadows and it was love at
first sniff. It didn’t take her long to recognize Sweetgrass after that. It
was as if the plant wanted her to find it. Together we designed experiments to compare the effects of the
two harvesting methods the basket makers had explained. Laurie’s education so far was full of the scientific method, but I wanted her to live
out a slightly different style of research. To me, an experiment is a kind
of conversation with plants: I have a question for them, but since we
don’t speak the same language, I can’t ask them directly and they won’t
answer verbally. But plants can be eloquent in their physical responses
and behaviors. Plants answer questions by the way they live, by their
responses to change; you just need to learn how to ask. I smile when I
hear my colleagues say “I discovered X.” That’s kind of like Columbus
claiming to have discovered America. It was here all along, it’s just
that he didn’t know it. Experiments are not about discovery but about
listening and translating the knowledge of other beings. mishkos kenomagwen: the teachings of grass 159
My colleagues might scoff at the notion of basket makers as scientists, but when Lena and her daughters take 50 percent of the sweetgrass,
observe the result, evaluate their findings, and then create management
guidelines from them, that sounds a lot like experimental science to me. Generations of data collection and validation through time builds up to
well-tested theories. At my university, as at many others, graduate students must present their thesis ideas to a faculty committee. Laurie did a wonderful
job of outlining the proposed experiment, ably describing multiple
study sites, the many replicates, and intensive sampling techniques. But when she was through speaking there was an uneasy silence in the
conference room. One professor shuffled through the proposal pages
and pushed them aside dismissively. “I don’t see anything new here for
science,” he said. “There’s not even a theoretical framework.” A theory, to scientists, means something rather different from its
popular use, which suggests something speculative or untested. A scientific theory is a cohesive body of knowledge, an explanation that is
consistent among a range of cases and can allow you to predict what
might happen in unknown situations. Like this one. Our research was
most definitely grounded in theory—Lena’s, primarily—in the traditional ecological knowledge of indigenous peoples: If we use a plant
respectfully, it will flourish. If we ignore it, it will go away. This is
a theory generated from millennia of observations of plant response
to harvest, subject to peer review by generations of practitioners, from
basket makers to herbalists. Despite the weight of this truth, the committee could only struggle not to roll their eyes. The dean looked over the glasses that had slid down his nose, fixing Laurie with a pointed stare and directing a sidelong glance toward
me. “Anyone knows that harvesting a plant will damage the population. You’re wasting your time. And I’m afraid I don’t find this whole traditional knowledge thing very convincing.” Like the former schoolteacher
she was, Laurie was unfailingly calm and gracious as she explained further, but her eyes were steely. Later, though, they were filled with tears. Mine, too. In the early
160 Picking Sweetgrass
years, no matter how carefully you prepared, this was nearly a rite of
passage for women scientists—the condescension, the verbal smackdown from academic authorities, especially if you had the audacity to
ground your work in the observations of old women who had probably
not finished high school, and talked to plants to boot. Getting scientists to consider the validity of indigenous knowledge
is like swimming upstream in cold, cold water. They’ve been so conditioned to be skeptical of even the hardest of hard data that bending their minds toward theories that are verified without the expected
graphs or equations is tough. Couple that with the unblinking assumption that science has cornered the market on truth and there’s not much
room for discussion. Undeterred, we carried on. The basket makers had given us the prerequisites of the scientific method: observation, pattern, and a testable
hypothesis. That sounded like science to me. So we began by setting
up experimental plots in the meadows to ask the plants the question
“Do these two different harvest methods contribute to decline?” And
then we tried to detect their answer. We chose dense sweetgrass stands
where the population had been restored rather than compromising
native stands where pickers were active. With incredible patience, Laurie did a census of the sweetgrass
population in every plot to obtain precise measures of population density prior to harvest. She even marked individual stems of grass with
colored plastic ties to keep track of them. When all had been tallied,
she then began the harvest. The plots were subject to one of the two harvest methods the basket makers had described. Laurie took half of the stems in each plot,
pinching them off one by one carefully at the base in some plots and
yanking up a tuft and leaving a small ragged gap in the sod in others. Experiments must have controls, of course, so she left an equal number
of plots alone and did not harvest them at all.